Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 61 (2018) 363-405
Submitted 10/2017; published 02/2018
Actively Estimating Crowd Annotation Consensus
Yunus Emre Kara
yunus.kara@boun.edu.tr
Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University
TR-34342, Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
Gaye Genc
gaye.genc@boun.edu.tr
Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University
TR-34342, Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
Oya Aran
aranoya@gmail.com
Independent Researcher
Lale Akarun
akarun@boun.edu.tr
Department of Computer Engineering, Bogazici University
TR-34342, Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
Abstract
The rapid growth of storage capacity and processing power has caused machine learning
applications to increasingly rely on using immense amounts of labeled data. It has become
more important than ever to have fast and inexpensive ways to annotate vast amounts
of data. With the emergence of crowdsourcing services, the research direction has gravi-
tated toward putting the wisdom of crowds to better use. Unfortunately, spammers and
inattentive annotators pose a threat to the quality and trustworthiness of the consensus.
Thus, high quality consensus estimation from crowd annotated data requires a meticulous
choice of the candidate annotator and the sample in need of a new annotation. Due to
time and budget limitations, it is of utmost importance that this choice is carried out while
the annotation collection is in progress. We call this process active crowd-labeling. To this
end, we propose an active crowd-labeling approach for actively estimating consensus from
continuous-valued crowd annotations. Our method is based on annotator models with un-
known parameters, and Bayesian inference is employed to reach a consensus in the form
of ordinal, binary, or continuous values. We introduce ranking functions for choosing the
candidate annotator and sample pair for requesting an annotation. In addition, we propose
a penalizing method for preventing annotator domination, investigate the explore-exploit
trade-oﬀfor incorporating new annotators into the system, and study the eﬀects of induc-
ing a stopping criterion based on consensus quality. We also introduce the crowd-labeled
Head Pose Annotations datasets. Experimental results on the benchmark datasets used
in the literature and the Head Pose Annotations datasets suggest that our method pro-
vides high-quality consensus by using as few as one ﬁfth of the annotations (∼80% cost
reduction), thereby providing a budget and time-sensitive solution to the crowd-labeling
problem.
1. Introduction
In the machine learning domain, labeled datasets are valuable commodities. Computing
resources have increased exponentially for two decades, driving machine learning toward
big data applications. The introduction of the ImageNet database (Deng, Dong, Socher, Li,
Li, & Fei-Fei, 2009), a large crowd-labeled dataset, and the success of deep neural network
©2018 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

---PAGE---

Kara, Genc, Aran, & Akarun
methods have further pushed the research direction toward the use of large datasets. This
popularity has resulted in the introduction of many large crowd-labeled datasets such as
the recently introduced Open Images dataset (Krasin et al., 2017).
Providing ground truth labels for large datasets often proves to be excessively time
consuming.
Thus, researchers tend to outsource the labeling process, especially for the
aforementioned large datasets. However, employing expert labelers is expensive. Crowd-
sourcing the labeling process is a cost-eﬀective and fast method to solve this problem,
especially when expertise is not necessarily required.
Crowd-labeling is the process of collecting annotations from crowds and using them
for estimating consensus values to be used as labels. However, inattentive annotators and
spammers reduce the quality of consensuses.
Although there are numerous methods in
the literature that deal with the low quality annotations, most are eﬀective only after
the annotation process is completed. At this point, valuable time and money are already
spent. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to observe and understand the behavior of the
annotators early on in the annotation process and improve the quality of consensuses.
The classical use of crowd-labeling is analogous to a careless shopper who buys exces-
sively without proper planning and ends up throwing away their purchase when the product
is of low quality or unneeded. In contrast, imagine that the researcher is a meticulous shop-
per with limited time and money. The most important questions on their mind would be:
What am I in need of purchasing and which vendor should I purchase it from? Applying
this reasoning to the crowd-labeling problem calls for a smarter solution and active learning
is the remedy to this problem. The general idea of active learning can be applied to the
crowd-labeling problem in terms of choosing which annotation to incorporate into the an-
notation pool. In this work, the process of smart annotation collection using crowdsourcing
is called active crowd-labeling.
Many crowd-labeling problems target to obtain continuous or ordinal labels, such as the
position of an object, age of a person, or air temperature. Surprisingly, active crowd-labeling
for continuous-valued annotations is a rather sidelined open issue. Related literature on ac-
tive crowd-labeling mainly focuses on binary annotation problems due to several reasons.
First of all, formulating the active crowd-labeling problem in a binary setting is often more
tractable with provable mathematical guarantees. Due to the nature of the continuous do-
main, providing mathematical guarantees in active crowd-labeling solutions proves to be
hard, if not impossible. This has pushed the researchers to work with well-studied algo-
rithms by binarizing existing continuous or ordinal annotations. Additionally, presenting
the annotation tasks in the form of yes/no or positive/negative reduces task intricacy for
the annotators. Although working with binary annotations has several advantages, valu-
able information is often lost during binarization. Moreover, binary active crowd-labeling
approaches are simply impractical when continuous labels are sought. In this work, we esti-
mate the crowd consensus to be used as sample labels from continuous-valued annotations
while reducing the cost of the annotation process by employing active crowd-labeling.
We introduce an eﬀective mechanism that decides which sample needs a new annotation
and who should annotate it.
The method we propose is based on annotator modeling
and consensus estimation by Bayesian inference, which is used for producing ordinal and
binary labels in addition to continuous labels. One advantage of the method is that it is
unsupervised: the gold standard label is not needed for any sample. The proposed method
364