Online crowdsourcing: rating annotators and obtaining cost-effective labels
Peter Welinder
Pietro Perona
California Institute of Technology
{welinder,perona}@caltech.edu
Abstract
Labeling large datasets has become faster, cheaper, and
easier with the advent of crowdsourcing services like Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. How can one trust the labels ob-
tained from such services? We propose a model of the la-
beling process which includes label uncertainty, as well a
multi-dimensional measure of the annotators’ ability. From
the model we derive an online algorithm that estimates the
most likely value of the labels and the annotator abilities.
It ﬁnds and prioritizes experts when requesting labels, and
actively excludes unreliable annotators. Based on labels
already obtained, it dynamically chooses which images will
be labeled next, and how many labels to request in order
to achieve a desired level of conﬁdence. Our algorithm is
general and can handle binary, multi-valued, and continu-
ous annotations (e.g. bounding boxes). Experiments on a
dataset containing more than 50,000 labels show that our
algorithm reduces the number of labels required, and thus
the total cost of labeling, by a large factor while keeping
error rates low on a variety of datasets.
1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing, the act of outsourcing work to a large
crowd of workers, is rapidly changing the way datasets are
created. Not long ago, labeling large datasets could take
weeks, if not months. It was necessary to train annotators
on custom-built interfaces, often in person, and to ensure
they were motivated enough to do high quality work. Today,
with services such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), it
is possible to assign annotation jobs to hundreds, even thou-
sands, of computer-literate workers and get results back in
a matter of hours. This opens the door to labeling huge
datasets with millions of images, which in turn provides
great possibilities for training computer vision algorithms.
The quality of the labels obtained from annotators varies.
Some annotators provide random or bad quality labels in the
hope that they will go unnoticed and still be paid, and yet
others may have good intentions but completely misunder-
stand the task at hand. The standard solution to the problem
of “noisy” labels is to assign the same labeling task to many
2
25
22
26
2
25
22
26
2
25
22
26
2
25
22
26
2
25
22
26
2
25
22
26
Figure 1. Examples of binary labels obtained from Amazon Me-
chanical Turk, (see Figure 2 for an example of continuous labels).
The boxes show the labels provided by four workers (identiﬁed by
the number in each box); green indicates that the worker selected
the image, red means that he or she did not. The task for each an-
notator was to select only images that he or she thought contained
a Black-chinned Hummingbird. Figure 5 shows the expertise and
bias of the workers. Worker 25 has a high false positive rate, and
22 has a high false negative rate. Worker 26 provides inconsistent
labels, and 2 is the annotator with the highest accuracy. Photos
in the top row were classiﬁed to contain a Black-chinned Hum-
mingbird by our algorithm, while the ones in the bottom row were
not.
different annotators, in the hope that at least a few of them
will provide high quality labels or that a consensus emerges
from a great number of labels. In either case, a large number
of labels is necessary, and although a single label is cheap,
the costs can accumulate quickly.
If one is aiming for a given label quality for the minimum
time and money, it makes more sense to dynamically decide
on the number of labelers needed. If an expert annotator
provides a label, we can probably rely on it being of high
quality, and we may not need more labels for that particular
task. On the other hand, if an unreliable annotator provides
a label, we should probably ask for more labels until we ﬁnd
an expert or until we have enough labels from non-experts
to let the majority decide the label.
1
brought to you by
CORE
View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Caltech Authors - Main

---PAGE---

We present an online algorithm to estimate the reliability
or expertise of the annotators, and to decide how many la-
bels to request per image based on who has labeled it. The
model is general enough to handle many different types of
annotations, and we show results on binary, multi-valued,
and continuous-valued annotations collected from MTurk.
The general annotator model is presented in Section 3
and the online version in Section 4.
Adaptations of the
model to discrete and continuous annotations are discussed
in Section 5. The datasets are described in Section 6, the
experiments in Section 7, and we conclude in Section 8.
2. Related Work
The quality of crowdsourced labels (also called annotations
or tags) has been studied before in different domains. In
computer vision, the quality of annotations provided by
MTurk workers and by volunteers has been explored for a
wide range of annotation types [8, 4]. In natural language
processing, Snow et al. [7] gathered labels from MTurk and
compared the quality to ground truth.
The most common method for obtaining ground truth an-
notations from crowdsourced labels is by applying a major-
ity consensus heuristic. This has been taken one step further
by looking at the consistency between labelers. For multi-
valued annotations, Dawid and Skene [1] modeled the in-
dividual annotator accuracy by a confusion matrix. Sheng
et al. [5] also modeled annotator quality, and showed how
repeated and selective labeling increased the overall label-
ing quality on synthetic data. Smyth et al. [6] integrated
the opinions of many experts to determine a gold standard,
and Spain and Perona [9] developed a method for combin-
ing prioritized lists obtained from different annotators. Us-
ing annotator consistency to obtain ground truth has also
been used in the context of paired games and CAPTCHAs
[11, 12]. Whitehill et al. [14] consider the difﬁculty of the
task and the ability of the annotators. Annotator models
have also been used to train classiﬁers with noisy labels [3].
Vijayanarasimhan and Grauman [10] proposed a system
which actively asks for image labels that are the most infor-
mative and cost effective. To our knowledge, the problem
of online estimation of annotator reliabilities has not been
studied before.
3. Modeling Annotators and Labels
We assume that each image i has an unknown “target value”
which we denote by zi. This may be a continuous or dis-
crete scalar or vector. The set of all N images, indexed
by image number, is I = {1, . . . , N}, and the set of corre-
sponding target values is abbreviated z = {zi}N
i=1. The reli-
ability or expertise of annotator j is described by a vector of
parameters, aj. For example, it can be scalar, aj = aj, such
as the probability that the annotator provides a correct label;
Figure 2. Examples of bounding boxes (10 per image) obtained
from MTurk workers who were instructed to provide a snug ﬁt.
Per our model, the green boxes are correct and the red boxes in-
correct. Most workers provide consistent labels, but two unreliable
workers stand out: no. 53 and 58 (they provided two of the incor-
rect boxes in each image). As can be seen from Figure 6c, most of
the labels provided by these two workers were of low quality.
speciﬁc annotator parameterizations are discussed in Sec-
tion 5. There are M annotators in total, A = {1, . . . , M},
and the set of their parameter vectors is a = {aj}M
j=1. Each
annotator j provides labels Lj = {lij}i∈Ij for all or a sub-
set of the images, Ij ⊆I. Likewise, each image i has la-
bels Li = {lij}j∈Ai provided by a subset of the annotators
Ai ⊆A. The set of all labels is denoted L. For simplicity,
we will assume that the labels lij belong to the same set as
the underlying target values zi; this assumption could, in
principle, be relaxed.
Our causal model of the labeling process is shown
schematically in Figure 3.
The image target values and
annotator parameters are assumed to be generated inde-
pendently. To ensure that the estimation process degrades
gracefully with little available label data, we take the
Bayesian point of view with priors on zi and aj parameter-
ized by ζ and α respectively. The priors encode our prior
belief of how skilled the annotators are (e.g. that half will be
experts and the rest unskilled), and what kind of target val-
ues we expect. The joint probability distribution can thus
be factorized as
p(L, z, a) =
N
Y
i=1
p(zi | ζ)
M
Y
j=1
p(aj | α)
Y
lij∈L
p(lij | zi, aj).
(1)
Inference:
Given the observed variables, that is, the la-
bels L, we would like to infer the hidden variables, i.e. the
target values z, as well as the annotator parameters a. This