Obtaining High-Quality Label by Distinguishing between
Easy and Hard Items in Crowdsourcing
Wei Wang, Xiang-Yu Guo, Shao-Yuan Li, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{wangw,guoxy,lisy,jiangy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
Abstract
Crowdsourcing systems make it possible to hire
voluntary workers to label large-scale data by of-
fering them small monetary payments. Usually, the
taskmaster requires to collect high-quality labels,
while the quality of labels obtained from the crowd
may not satisfy this requirement. In this paper, we
study the problem of obtaining high-quality labels
from the crowd and present an approach of learning
the difﬁculty of items in crowdsourcing, in which
we construct a small training set of items with es-
timated difﬁculty and then learn a model to predic-
t the difﬁculty of future items. With the predict-
ed difﬁculty, we can distinguish between easy and
hard items to obtain high-quality labels. For easy
items, the quality of their labels inferred from the
crowd could be high enough to satisfy the require-
ment; while for hard items, the crowd could not
provide high-quality labels, it is better to choose
a more knowledgable crowd or employ specialized
workers to label them. The experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed approach by learn-
ing to distinguish between easy and hard items can
signiﬁcantly improve the label quality.
1
Introduction
In recent years, unlabeled data can often be obtained abun-
dantly and cheaply, e.g., one can write a crawler in a few
lines of code and automatically download hundreds of thou-
sands of images from the internet.
Generally, these unla-
beled data cannot be directly used in machine learning, since
learning algorithms need data with labels to train a model
for making predictions, e.g., the complex deep neural net-
work requires large amounts of labeled data in the training
process. Providing labels for large amounts of unlabeled da-
ta has always been a challenge because labeling the data is
expensive and time-consuming.
An effective and efﬁcient
paradigm for label collection is crowdsourcing [Howe, 2006;
2008], e.g., in the famous crowdsourcing system Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT), the taskmaster submits the task that
can be completed by voluntary workers in exchange for small
monetary payments. This task is usually called Human Intel-
ligence Task (HIT), which computers are currently unable to
perform while humans can complete easily, e.g., annotating
images of trees versus images of non-trees.
Crowdsourcing makes it possible for many independent
and relatively inexpensive workers to provide labels for large-
scale unlabeled data together. These workers usually come
from a large society and each of them is presented with mul-
tiple items of the crowdsourcing task. Each worker has to
answer the question about the item presented to her/him and
provides a label based on her/his own knowledge. Crowd-
sourcing can collect large-scale labels with small monetary
payments in a short period of time, unfortunately, these label-
s collected via crowdsourcing are typically highly erroneous
[Kazai et al., 2011; Vuurens et al., 2011] due to the fact that
most workers in the crowd are non-experts. In machine learn-
ing, label quality is crucial to the performance of learning
algorithm and higher-quality labels will bring better predic-
tions. How to obtain high-quality labels via crowdsourcing is
an important issue to address.
For improving the label quality, the common wisdom is
to add redundancy into the labels, i.e., each item is present-
ed with multiple workers. In this way, multiple labels are
collected for each item and the ﬁnal solution is determined
by aggregating these crowded labels [Sheng et al., 2008;
Snow et al., 2008; Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008]. In the past
few years, researchers have developed many methods for in-
ferring good labels from the crowd, most of which build prob-
abilistic models for the crowdsourcing process and derive
the labels using algorithms based on Expectation Maximiza-
tion (EM) and other inference tools. Raykar et al. [2009;
2010] used a two-coin model to measure the sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of each worker and iteratively estimated the t-
wo terms by an EM algorithm.
Whitehill et al.
[2009;
2010] formulated a probabilistic model of worker quality and
applied an EM algorithm to infer the most probable label.
Raykar and Yu [2012] developed an empirical Bayesian al-
gorithm based on EM to iteratively estimate the ground-truth
label and eliminate the spammers. Liu et al. [2012] trans-
formed the crowdsourcing problem into a variational infer-
ence problem in graphical models and inferred the labels with
variational inference tools including Belief Propagation and
Mean Field. Tian and Zhu [2015] inferred the ground-truth
label based on the max-margin principle by maximizing the
margin between the aggregated score of potential true label
and other alternatives. The minimax entropy principle has al-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2964

---PAGE---

so been introduced into crowdsourcing. Zhou et al. [2012;
2014] proposed a minimax entropy method to infer the
ground-truth label by minimizing the entropy of the proba-
bilistic distribution. Wauthier and Jordan [2011] proposed a
Bayesian framework named the Bayesian Bias Mitigation to
unify the process of inferring the labels and learning from
the inferred labels. Wang and Zhou [2016] presented a PAC
bound on the number of labels collected via crowdsourcing
for learning a good model.
Some other works focused on how to choose which items
are assigned to each worker. Yan et al. [2011] employed a
probabilistic model to select the worker from which to query
the label. Karger et al. [2011; 2014] proposed an item assign-
ment algorithm based on a random regular bipartite graph.
Ho and Vaughan [2012] developed an algorithm for assign-
ing heterogeneous items to workers with different qualities
based on the online primal-dual technique [Buchbinder and
Naor, 2005]. Later, Ho and Vaughan [2013] utilized items
with true labels to estimate workers’ performance and pro-
posed a provably near-optimal assignment algorithm for het-
erogeneous items.
Liu et al.
[2013] also exploited items
with known answers to evaluate workers’ performance for
item assignment.
Chen et al.
[2013; 2015] formulated a
ﬁnite horizon Markov Decision Process in a Bayesian set-
ting and characterized the optimality using dynamic program-
ming. Raykar and Agrawal [2014] modeled the item assign-
ment problem as a Markov decision process and deﬁned an
Bayesian decision theoretic utility function to jointly consid-
er the cost for acquiring additional labels and the possible ac-
curacy improvement. There are also some interesting work-
s on developing payment mechanisms to encourage workers
to provide high-quality labels for items [Shah et al., 2015;
Shah and Zhou, 2015; 2016]. In this situation, the task is
posted together with the labeling guidelines and payment in-
structions, and it is demanded that the worker label each item
according to her/his own belief of the answer being correct.
They also assumed that the threshold of this belief is known to
the payment mechanism designer and that the worker’s pay-
ment is based on her/his performance on the gold standard
items (a set of items whose true labels are known). However,
it is difﬁcult to get this threshold in real-world applications
and the gold standard items will increase the labeling cost.
1.1
Our Focus and Contribution
In crowdsourcing, thousands of workers have internet ac-
cess to the posted task. These voluntary workers have dif-
ferent abilities, since they may come from different region-
s, receive different educations and have different knowledge.
Usually, the items of the crowdsourcing task also have dif-
ferent difﬁculties for different workers. For easy items, most
workers could provide correct labels with high probability,
aggregating several labels from the crowd could infer the
high-quality labels; while for hard items which need specif-
ic domain knowledge for correct labeling, only a portion of
the crowd could provide correct labels with high probability,
aggregating several labels from the crowd without knowing
who these knowledgable workers are may not infer the high-
quality labels. An optimistic idea is to identify these knowl-
edgable workers and let them provide labels to hard items.
However, it is difﬁcult to identify the knowledgable work-
ers without prior knowledge about the crowd. Furthermore,
in many crowdsourcing systems, the voluntary workers are
anonymous and transient, the taskmaster cannot assign par-
ticular items to an identiﬁed worker, nor could she/he expect
some worker to show up again in the future.
This motivates us to propose a novel crowdsourcing ap-
proach, in which we learn to distinguish between easy and
hard items for the crowd. For easy items, it is feasible to
derive high-quality labels from the current crowd; while for
hard items, it is difﬁcult to derive high-quality labels from
the current crowd without prior knowledge. Choosing a more
knowledgable crowd or employing specialized workers for
these hard items will be a good strategy for obtaining high-
quality labels. Following this direction, we propose a two-
stage efﬁcient algorithm: in the ﬁrst stage, we let the crowd
label a small portion of items to estimate their difﬁculty; then
in the second stage we train a model with this training set to
predict the difﬁculty of future items. Similar items should
have similar labels and the worker would provide similar la-
bels to similar items. Thus, similar items should have similar
labeling difﬁculty with respect to the same crowd. This could
explain why the process of learning the difﬁculty is reason-
able. The experimental results demonstrate that learning to
distinguish between easy and hard items with the proposed
algorithm can signiﬁcantly improve the label quality.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. After intro-
ducing some preliminaries in Section 2, we present our ap-
proach in Section 3 and discuss how to choose the parameter
in Section 4. Finally, we conduct experiments in Section 5
and make a conclusion in Section 6.
2
Preliminaries
In this paper, we consider the task involving binary-choice
items. The task has a set of m items {x1, . . . , xm} over X,
each item corresponds to a binary-choice example xi with an
unobserved true label yi ∈{0, 1}, 1 ≤i ≤m (e.g., annotat-
ing whether an image contains trees or not). These items will
be labeled by a crowd, where W denotes the set of all work-
ers in the crowd. To improve label quality and reliability, an
example xi is generally presented to N workers denoted by
{w1, . . . , wN}, wj ∈W, 1 ≤j ≤N. For any item xi ∈X,
a worker wj provides a label yj
i = wj(xi) ∈{0, 1} on xi
and a ﬁnal label is then inferred for xi based on the multiple
labels.
The item may have different difﬁculties for different work-
ers and the difﬁculty depends on many factors, e.g., the time
it takes for labeling, the knowledge required for correct label-
ing, the worker’s honesty, the payment mechanism, and the
item itself. In fact, the difﬁculty of an item can be evaluated
from the output of the worker, i.e., if worker wj provides a
correct label to item xi with great probability, it is regarded
that xi is an easy item for wj; if wj provides an incorrect label
to xi with great probability, it is regarded that xi is a hard item
for wj. The posterior probability dxi(wj) = P(yj
i ̸= yi|xi)
denotes the probability that wj provides an incorrect label for
xi and can be thought of as the difﬁculty of xi for wj. For any
item x, we deﬁne the following difﬁculty of x for the crowd
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2965

---PAGE---

W:
Deﬁnition 1 (Difﬁculty) Let DW denote the underlying dis-
tribution over the workers in the crowd W, the difﬁculty of
the item (x, y) with respect to the crowd W is deﬁned as
dx(W) =
Z
w∈DW
P
 w(x) ̸= y|x

p(w)dw.
For the sake of convenience, we will write dx(W) as dx
for the ﬁxed crowd W. In particular, one frequently pro-
vides nearly random labels to the items that are too dif-
ﬁcult to answer [Shah and Zhou, 2015], and the empiri-
cal observations also show that the workers in crowdsourc-
ing systems, as opposed to being adversarial in nature, at
worst provide random labels to items [Yuen et al., 2011;
Gadiraju et al., 2015]. Although the crowd may contain few
adversaries who give wrong answers deliberately, it is reason-
able to assume that dx ≤1/2, i.e., the crowd is not dominated
by the adversaries. When dx is small, x is an easy item; while
dx is large, x is an hard item. For hard items, there may exist
some knowledgable workers wj with small dx(wj). Howev-
er, it is not feasible to identify these knowledgable workers
for hard items without prior knowledge about the crowd.
3
Our Method
When no prior knowledge about the crowd is known, random-
ly selecting N workers from the crowd and using the majority
voting to infer the ﬁnal label by for x is a good error-pruning
strategy, i.e.,
by =





1
if
1
N
PN
j=1 yj > 1
2
random guess
if
1
N
PN
j=1 yj = 1
2
0
if
1
N
PN
j=1 yj < 1
2
For the item x, we can give the upper bound on the label
quality for majority voting with respect to the difﬁculty of the
item in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 For the item (x, y) and the crowd W, let by
denote the inferred label of x with majority voting from N
workers, the following inequality holds.
P(by ̸= y) ≤exp

−2N(1/2 −dx)2
.
(1)
Proof. Proposition 1 can be proved with Hoeffding [1963]
bound.
□
Proposition 1 states that small dx will bring high-quality
label while large dx will lead to low-quality label.
If the
taskmaster requires that a minimum quality of the labels ob-
tained from the crowd should be achieved, the maximum dif-
ﬁculty dx can be derived according to Equation 1. This max-
imum difﬁculty dx can be thought of as a threshold η, the
easy items whose dx is no larger than η could be labeled by
the crowd and the label quality of them could satisfy the re-
quirement; while the hard items whose dx is larger than η
should not be labeled by the current crowd since the crowd
may provide low-quality labels for them with great risk.
Now an important issue arises: how to estimate the difﬁcul-
ty efﬁciently? A straight-forward way is that we let the crowd
label all items and then estimate dx with these crowded label-
s. The item x ∈X is labeled by N workers {w1, . . . , wN},
we give the deﬁnition of empirical difﬁculty bdx of x:
bdx = 1
N
N
X
j=1
I(yj ̸= by).
(2)
With this empirical difﬁculty bdx, we give the following
proposition:
Proposition 2 For the item (x, y) and any ϵ ∈(0, 1), the
following inequality on bdx and dx holds.
P

bdx −dx
≥ϵ

≤2 exp
 −2Nϵ2
.
(3)
Proof.
For the item (x, y), if by
=
y, it is easy
to prove that P(|dx −bdx|
≥
ϵ)
≤
2 exp(−2Nϵ2)
with Hoeffding [1963] bound; if by
̸=
y, it is easy to
prove that P(|(1 −dx) −bdx| ≥ϵ) ≤2 exp(−2Nϵ2)
with
Hoeffding
[1963]
bound.
So
we
get
that
P
 
|1/2 −dx| −|1/2 −bdx|
≥ϵ

≤2 exp(−2Nϵ2).
Since the label by is inferred by majority voting, we get that
bdx ≤1/2 with Equation 2. Considering that dx ≤1/2, we
have that P
 
bdx −dx
≥ϵ

≤2 exp(−2Nϵ2).
□
Proposition 2 states that bdx is a good approximation of dx
when we can not reach the true label of the item. After the
crowd has labeled all items, we get the estimation bdx of the
true difﬁculty dx for each item. If bdx ≤η, it implies that x is
an easy item; if bdx > η, it implies that x is a hard item. For
the requirement of high label quality, we should not accept
the inferred labels for hard items. In this situation, the crowd
has provided labels to these hard items, but we could not ac-
cept their labels in order to avoid the risk. This wastes too
much labeling cost and motivates us to develop an approach
for estimating the difﬁculty before labeling all items.
In order to address this problem we propose a two-stage
algorithm. In the ﬁrst stage, we select a small portion of
items T ⊂X randomly from the whole set X and let the
crowd provide labels to them. With these crowded labels we
estimate the empirical difﬁculty bdx of the item x ∈T and
construct a training set L with the estimated difﬁculty, i.e.,
L =

(x1, bdx1), . . . , (x|T |, bdx|T |)
. Then in the second stage
we learn a model with L to predict the difﬁculty of the item in
X −T . With the predicted difﬁculty, we set a threshold η to
distinguish between easy and hard items (please see Section 4
for how to choose η).
Let Φ : X →RM denote the kernel mapping from the
input space X to RM, considering the linear hypothesis space
H = {x →h · Φ(x) + b : h ∈RM, b ∈R},
we assume that the difﬁculty is determined by the function
that
f(x) =
1
1 + exp

−
 h · Φ(x) + b

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2966

---PAGE---

with h∗and b∗, i.e., for any item x,
dx =
1
1 + exp

−
 h∗· Φ(x) + b∗.
(4)
With the training set L, we try to ﬁnd the optimal (h∗, b∗)
with Kernel Ridge Regression by minimizing the following
loss function:
min
h,b Loss(h, b) =
m
X
i=1
 f(xi) −bdxi
2 + α∥h∥2.
(5)
For this learning problem, our aim is to predict whether the
item x should be labeled by the crowd to achieve high-quality
label with small risk, i.e., bdx ≤η or not. For a good model
f(·), the easy items in the training set L should also be pre-
dicted as the easy ones by f(·), i.e., if bdxi ≤η, f(xi) ≤η;
otherwise, f(xi) > η. So we introduce the constraints into
the optimization and Equation 5 is transformed into:
min
h,b Loss(h, b) =
m
X
i=1
 f(xi) −bdxi
2 + α∥h∥2,
s.t., (bdxi −η)
 f(xi) −η

≥0.
(6)
After introducing the parameter β, the optimization problem
with constraints can be formalized as
min
h,b Loss(h, b) =
m
X
i=1
 f(xi) −bdxi
2 + α∥h∥2
+β
m
X
i=1
I
 ( bdxi −η)(f(xi) −η) ≤0

.
(7)
The optimization problem in Equation 7 can not be solved
efﬁciently, since the last term I(t ≤0) is not differentiable.
We replace it with its surrogate loss function log2(1 + e−t)
and get the optimization problem shown as
min
h,b Loss(h, b) =
m
X
i=1
 f(xi) −bdxi
2 + α∥h∥2
+β
m
X
i=1
log2

1 + exp
 −(bdxi −η)(f(xi) −η

.
(8)
Thus, by solving the optimization problem in Equation 8 with
the training set L, we can ﬁnd the optimal solution (h∗, b∗)
to predict the difﬁculty of the item in X −T . The process is
described in Algorithm 1.
With the predicted difﬁculty dx =
1
1+exp(−(h∗·Φ(x)+b∗))
and the threshold η, we can determine whether an item should
be labeled by the crowd, i.e., if dx ≤η, x should be labeled
by the crowd; otherwise, x should not be labeled by the crowd
due to high risk. In the following section, we will discuss how
to choose the parameter η.
4
The Parameter η
η is a parameter in the process, smaller η will bring less easy
items and higher label quality, while larger η will lead to more
easy items but lower label quality. η depends on the required
label quality or the ratio of items that need to be labeled by
the crowd, we will discuss how to choose it in this section.
Algorithm 1 Difﬁculty Learning
Input:
Unlabeled items X, the crowd W, the threshold η, the pa-
rameter γ and the kernel Φ.
Process:
1. Select number of γ|X| items randomly from X as T ;
2. Each item xi ∈T is presented to N workers from the
crowd W and its label byi is inferred by majority voting;
3. Calculate the estimated difﬁculty bdxi for each item xi ∈
T according to Equation 2 and get the training set L =

(x1, bdx1), . . . , (x|T |, bdx|T |)
;
4. Solve the optimization problem to get (h∗, b∗) with the
training set L according to Equation 8.
Output:
The difﬁculty dx =
1
1+exp(−(h∗·Φ(x)+b∗)) for each item
x ∈X −T .
• Label Quality. Choose η with respect to the required
label quality.
Proposition 1 indicates that the upper bound on the error
rate of labels depends on the difﬁculty of the item. We
can derive the maximum difﬁculty dx max according to
the required label accuracy and set the threshold η =
dx max.
• Item Ratio. Choose η with respect to the required item
ratio.
In some applications, the volume of unlabeled item-
s is huge.
The taskmaster must set a minimum ra-
tio R of these unlabeled items that need to be labeled
by the crowd to save labeling cost, since employing
the crowd costs less than employing specialized work-
ers.
Thus, R is the ratio of easy items whose difﬁ-
culty is no larger than η. With the training set L =
{(x1, bdx1), . . . , (x|T |, bdx|T |)}, we set η according to the
following Equation 9, i.e., we use the ratio of easy items
in the training set L as an estimation of R.
η = min
n
η ∈[0, 1] :
{x ∈L : dx ≤η}
L
≥R
o
.
(9)
• Label Information.
In other applications, the taskmaster may require that
both the ratio of items that need to be labeled by the
crowd and the label accuracy on these labeled items
should be as high as possible. Let A denote the label
accuracy on the easy items that need to be labeled by the
crowd, A can be denoted as
A =
{x ∈X −T : by = y ∧dx ≤η}
{x ∈X −T : dx ≤η}
.
The ratio of easy items can be denoted as
R =
{x ∈X −T : dx ≤η}
{x ∈X −T
.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2967

---PAGE---

We deﬁne Label Information I in Equation 10, i.e., the
probability that the item in X −T can be labeled cor-
rectly by the crowd.
I = A · R =
{x ∈X −T : by = y ∧dx ≤η}
{x ∈X −T
. (10)
If the taskmaster requires that both the ratio of labeled
items and the label accuracy on these labeled items are
as high as possible, it implies that the threshold η should
be the one that maximizes the label information I.
In real-world crowdsourcing, most items can be labeled
correctly by the crowd, the number of hard items is
much less than that of easy ones and the probability dis-
tribution of item’s difﬁculty can be estimated from the
training set L. In the following part of this section, we
give an example for choosing the parameter η. From the
training set L constructed in Section 5, we get the cu-
mulative distribution function of item’s difﬁculty, which
is depicted as the black dashed line in Figure 1. Con-
sidering the truncated Beta distribution whose probabil-
ity density function is shown in Equation 11 with pa-
rameters s and t, Z is the normalization term such that
R 1
2
0
1
Z
xs−1(1−x)t−1
B(s,t)
= 1, we get its cumulative distribu-
tion function with s = 0.231 and t = 0.774, which is
depicted as the blue solid line in Figure 1.
1
Z
xs−1(1 −x)t−1
B(s, t)
, where B(s, t) = Γ(s)Γ(t)
Γ(s + t)
(11)
It can be found that the cumulative distribution function
of item’s difﬁculty in the training set L is very close to
the cumulative distribution function of the truncated Be-
ta distribution with s = 0.231 and t = 0.774. So we
assume that the probability distribution of item’s difﬁ-
culty follows the truncated Beta distribution to facilitate
the calculation. For easy items, with Proposition 1 we
get that A ≥1 −exp
 −2N(1/2 −η)2
since dx ≤η;
with the truncated Beta distribution, we get that the ratio
of easy items is
R =
Z η
0
1
Z
xs−1(1 −x)t−1
B(s, t)
.
So we get that
I = A · R
≥1
Z
 1 −exp(−2N(1/2 −η)2)
 Z η
0
xs−1(1 −x)t−1
B(s, t)
.
Thus, the optimal η∗can be denoted as
η∗= arg max
 1 −exp(−2N(1/2 −η)2)

·
Z η
0
xs−1(1 −x)t−1
B(s, t)
.
With the parameters s = 0.231, t = 0.774 and N = 9,
the optimal η∗≈0.16.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
The diﬃculty d
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
empirical data
truncated Beta
Figure 1: Cumulative distribution function.
5
Experiments
In order to study whether we can obtain high-quality labels
by learning to distinguish between easy and hard items we
conduct experiments in this section.
We perform experiments on the real data. In the task, there
are 1499 different images and the workers are required to la-
bel whether tree appears in the image or not. The crowd that
labels the data consists of 38 graduate students. Each image is
labeled by several workers selected randomly from the crowd.
Due to various reasons, some workers did not return their la-
bels for some images. Finally, we drop those images labeled
by less than 5 workers and get 1495 images. The number of
labels provided by workers for each image ranges from 5 to
16. We use ﬁsher vector of each image as its feature, which
is a 1248-dimension vector.
We randomly select 20% images to generate the training
set L and the difﬁculty of these images are estimated accord-
ing to Equation 2. The optimization problem in Equation 8 is
solved to predict the difﬁculty of the images in X −L, where
the kernel function Φ is set to be the linear kernel, α = 10−4
and β = 3. The parameter η is set between 0.1 and 0.3. Each
experiment is repeated for 50 runs and the average perfor-
mance is depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2(a) presents the ratio of images that are predicted
as the easy ones and the accuracy of the labels inferred from
the crowd on easy items with respect to different choices of
η. The line Ratio of Easy denotes the ratio of images that are
predicted as the easy ones; the line MV ACC-Easy denotes the
accuracy of labels on easy items; the line MV ACC-Overall
denotes the accuracy of labels inferred by majority voting
when all items are labeled by the crowd; the line OptKG
ACC-Overall denotes the accuracy of labels inferred by the
state-of-art crowdsourcing method OptKG [Chen et al., 2013;
2015] when all items are labeled by the crowd. From Fig-
ure 2(a) we ﬁnd that the label accuracy of easy items is much
higher than that of MV ACC-Overall and that of OptKG ACC-
Overall. For example, when η = 0.2 the ratio of easy items
is 0.773 and the label accuracy of easy items is 95.5%, while
the accuracy of MV ACC-Overall is 92.0% and the accuracy
of OptKG ACC-Overall is 92.3%.
We also present the results on hard items in Figure 2(b),
which shows the ratio of items that are predicted as the hard
ones and the accuracy of the labels inferred on these hard
items with respect to different choices of η. From Figure
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2968

---PAGE---

0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Threshold
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Ratio of Easy
MV ACC - Easy
MV ACC - Overall
OptKG ACC - Overall
Ratio of Easy
(a) Accuracy and ratio w.r.t. easy items.
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Threshold
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Ratio of hard
MV ACC - Hard
MV ACC - Overall
OptKG ACC - Overall
Ratio of Hard
(b) Accuracy and ratio w.r.t. hard items.
Figure 2: Results on the data.
2(b) we ﬁnd that the label accuracy of hard items is much
lower than that of MV ACC-Overall and that of OptKG ACC-
Overall. For example, when η = 0.2, the ratio of hard items
is 0.227 and the label accuracy of these hard items is only
80.1%. The current crowd could not provide high-quality la-
bels to these hard items, we should ﬁnd a more knowledgable
crowd or employ specialized workers to label them.
Figure 2 validates that we could obtain high-quality label-
s by learning to distinguish between easy and hard items.
When the taskmaster requires high label quality, we should
choose a small η; when the taskmaster requires both high la-
bel quality and large ratio of items that need to be labeled by
the crowd, we should choose a medium η.
In order to show whether the size of training set L inﬂu-
ences the label accuracy, we run experiments with different
sizes of L, i.e., from 10% to 40% with an interval 5%, and
the results for a ﬁxed η = 0.2 are depicted in Figure 3. From
Figure 3 we can ﬁnd that the label accuracy on easy items
varies from 95.0% to 95.9% increasingly with the size of L
varying from 10% to 40%. It indicates that the label quality
is not very sensitive to the size of L.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an approach for obtaining high-
quality labels from the crowd by learning to distinguish be-
tween easy and hard items before they are sent out to work-
ers, which is complementary to the line of work that tries to
obtain reliable labels via crowdsourcing for machine learning
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
Size of training set
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
MV ACC - Easy
MV ACC - Hard
MV ACC - Overall
Figure 3: Accuracy with different sizes of L for η = 0.2.
or other applications. It allows for better post-processing of
hard items, i.e., we should ﬁnd a more knowledgable crowd
or employ specialized workers to label them, and provides
a possibility that the items could be completed by different
crowds with respect to their difﬁculty. We regard this work as
preliminary and expect that more researches will follow this
direction.
Acknowledgments
This
work
was
supported
by
the
NSFC
(61673202,
61673201), 973 Program (2014CB340501), and the Collabo-
rative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and
Industrialization.
References
[Buchbinder and Naor, 2005] Niv Buchbinder and Joseph
Naor.
Online primal-dual algorithms for covering and
packing problems. In ESA, pages 689–701, Palma de Mal-
lorca, Spain, 2005.
[Chen et al., 2013] Xi Chen, Qihang Lin, and Dengyong
Zhou. Optimistic knowledge gradient policy for optimal
budget allocation in crowdsourcing. In ICML, pages 64–
72, Atlanta, GA, 2013.
[Chen et al., 2015] Xi Chen, Qihang Lin, and Dengyong
Zhou. Statistical decision making for optimal budget al-
location in crowd labeling. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 16:1–46, 2015.
[Gadiraju et al., 2015] Ujwal Gadiraju,
Ricardo Kawase,
Stefan Dietze, and Gianluca Demartini.
Understanding
malicious behavior in crowdsourcing platforms: The case
of online surveys. In ACM CHI, pages 1631–1640, Seoul,
Republic of Korea, 2015.
[Ho and Vaughan, 2012] Chien-Ju
Ho
and
Jennifer
W.
Vaughan. Online task assignment in crowdsourcing mar-
kets. In AAAI, Toronto, Canada, 2012.
[Ho et al., 2013] Chien-Ju Ho, Shahin Jabbari, and Jen-
nifer W. Vaughan. Adaptive task assignment for crowd-
sourced classiﬁcation. In ICML, pages 534–542, Atlanta,
GA, 2013.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2969

---PAGE---

[Hoeffding, 1963] Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequali-
ties for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 58:13–30, 1963.
[Howe, 2006] Jeff Howe. The rise of crowdsourcing. Wired,
2006.
[Howe, 2008] Jeff Howe. Why the power of the crowd is
driving the future of business. Crown Business, 2008.
[Karger et al., 2011] David R. Karger, Sewoong Oh, and De-
vavrat Shah. Iterative learning for reliable crowdsourcing
systems.
In NIPS, pages 1953–1961. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 2011.
[Karger et al., 2014] David R. Karger, Sewoong Oh, and De-
vavrat Shah. Budget-optimal task allocation for reliable
crowdsourcing systems.
Operations Research, 62(1):1–
24, 2014.
[Kazai et al., 2011] Gabriella Kazai, Jaap Kamps, Marijn
Koolen, and Natasa Milic-Frayling.
Crowdsourcing for
book search evaluation: impact of hit design on compara-
tive system ranking. In ACM SIGIR, pages 205–214, Bei-
jing, China, 2011.
[Liu et al., 2012] Qiang Liu, Jian Peng, and Alexander T. Ih-
ler.
Variational inference for crowdsourcing.
In NIPS,
pages 701–709. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2012.
[Liu et al., 2013] Qiang Liu, Alexander T. Ihler, and Mark
Steyvers. Scoring workers in crowdsourcing: How many
control questions are enough? In NIPS, pages 1914–1922.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2013.
[Raykar and Agrawal, 2014] Vikas C. Raykar and Priyanka
Agrawal. Sequential crowdsourced labeling as an epsilon-
greedy exploration in a markov decision process. In AIS-
TATS, pages 832–840, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2014.
[Raykar and Yu, 2012] Vikas C. Raykar and Shipeng Yu. E-
liminating spammers and ranking annotators for crowd-
sourced labeling tasks. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 13:491–518, 2012.
[Raykar et al., 2009] Vikas C. Raykar, Shipeng Yu, Linda H.
Zhao, Anna K. Jerebko, Charles Florin, Gerardo Her-
mosillo Valadez, Luca Bogoni, and Linda Moy. Super-
vised learning from multiple experts: whom to trust when
everyone lies a bit. In ICML, Quebec, Canada, 2009.
[Raykar et al., 2010] Vikas C. Raykar, Shipeng Yu, Linda H.
Zhao, Gerardo Hermosillo Valadez, Charles Florin, Luca
Bogoni, and Linda Moy. Learning from crowds. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 11:1297–1322, 2010.
[Shah and Zhou, 2015] Nihar B. Shah and Dengyong Zhou.
Double or nothing: Multiplicative incentive mechanisms
for crowdsourcing. In NIPS, pages 1–9. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 2015.
[Shah and Zhou, 2016] Nihar B. Shah and Dengyong Zhou.
No oops, you won’t do it again: Mechanisms for self-
correction in crowdsourcing. In ICML, pages 1–10, New
York, NY, 2016.
[Shah et al., 2015] Nihar B. Shah, Dengyong Zhou, and Yu-
val Peres. Approval voting and incentives in crowdsourc-
ing. In ICML, pages 10–19, Lille, France, 2015.
[Sheng et al., 2008] Victor S. Sheng, Foster J. Provost, and
Panagiotis G. Ipeirotis. Get another label? improving data
quality and data mining using multiple, noisy labelers. In
ACM SIGKDD, pages 614–622, Las Vegas, NV, 2008.
[Snow et al., 2008] Rion Snow, Brendan O’Connor, Daniel
Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng. Cheap and fast - but is it
good? evaluating non-expert annotations for natural lan-
guage tasks. In EMNLP, pages 254–263, Honolulu, HI,
2008.
[Sorokin and Forsyth, 2008] Alexander
Sorokin
and
David A. Forsyth.
Utility data annotation with ama-
zon mechanical turk.
In CVPR Workshop on Internet
Vision, pages 1–8, Anchorage, AK, 2008.
[Tian and Zhu, 2015] Tian Tian and Jun Zhu. Max-margin
majority voting for learning from crowds. In NIPS, pages
1612–1620. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2015.
[Vuurens et al., 2011] Jeroen Vuurens, Arjen P. de Vries, and
Carsten Eickhoff. How much spam can you take? an anal-
ysis of crowdsourcing results to increase accuracy. In ACM
SIGIR Workshop on Crowdsourcing for Information Re-
trieval, pages 21–26, Beijing, China, 2011.
[Wang and Zhou, 2016] Lu Wang and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Cost-
saving effect of crowdsourcing learning. In IJCAI, pages
2111–2117, New York, NY, 2016.
[Wauthier and Jordan, 2011] Fabian
L.
Wauthier
and
Michael I. Jordan. Bayesian bias mitigation for crowd-
sourcing.
In NIPS, pages 1800–1808. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2011.
[Welinder et al., 2010] Peter
Welinder,
Steve
Branson,
Serge J. Belongie, and Pietro Perona. The multidimen-
sional wisdom of crowds.
In NIPS, pages 2424–2432.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2010.
[Whitehill et al., 2009] Jacob Whitehill, Paul Ruvolo, T-
ingfan Wu, Jacob Bergsma, and Javier R. Movellan.
Whose vote should count more: Optimal integration of la-
bels from labelers of unknown expertise. In NIPS, pages
2035–2043. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2009.
[Yan et al., 2011] Yan Yan, R´oomer Rosales, Glenn Fung,
and Jennifer G. Dy. Active learning from crowds. In ICM-
L, pages 1161–1168, Bellevue, WA, 2011.
[Yuen et al., 2011] Man-Ching
Yuen,
Irwin
King,
and
Kwong-Sak Leung. A survey of crowdsourcing system-
s. In SocialCom, pages 766–773, Boston, MA, 2011.
[Zhou et al., 2012] Dengyong Zhou, John C. Platt, Sumit
Basu, and Yi Mao. Learning from the wisdom of crowd-
s by minimax entropy. In NIPS, pages 2204–2212. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 2012.
[Zhou et al., 2014] Dengyong Zhou, Qiang Liu, John C.
Platt, and Christopher Meek. Aggregating ordinal labels
from crowds by minimax conditional entropy. In ICML,
pages 262–270, Beijing, China, 2014.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)
2970