Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in
Ground Truth Data Annotation
Hsuan Wei Liao1, Christopher Klugmann2, Daniel Kondermann2, Rafid Mahmood1,3
1Telfer School of Management, University of Ottawa, {hliao009, rmahmood}@uottawa.ca
2Quality Match, {ck, dk}@quality-match.com
3NVIDIA
High-quality data annotation is an essential but laborious and costly aspect of developing machine learning-
based software. We explore the inherent tradeoff between annotation accuracy and cost by detecting and
removing minority reports—instances where annotators provide incorrect responses—that indicate unneces-
sary redundancy in task assignments. We propose an approach to prune potentially redundant annotation
task assignments before they are executed by estimating the likelihood of an annotator disagreeing with
the majority vote for a given task. Our approach is informed by an empirical analysis over computer vision
datasets annotated by a professional data annotation platform, which reveals that the likelihood of a minority
report event is dependent primarily on image ambiguity, worker variability, and worker fatigue. Simulations
over these datasets show that we can reduce the number of annotations required by over 60% with a small
compromise in label quality, saving approximately 6.6 days-equivalent of labor. Our approach provides anno-
tation service platforms with a method to balance cost and dataset quality. Machine learning practitioners
can tailor annotation accuracy levels according to specific application needs, thereby optimizing budget allo-
cation while maintaining the data quality necessary for critical settings like autonomous driving technology.
1.
Introduction
Machine learning (ML) is the fundamental component of most image recognition-based
software from video conferencing to robotics and autonomous vehicles. The most critical
challenge in developing ML models for these systems is the availability of high-quality
labeled data to train the models (Dimensional Research 2019). For example, consider the
perception technology in autonomous vehicles used to detect obstacles and plan routes.
Autonomous vehicle developers collect billions of miles of driving video data per year to
improve the underlying models (Bigelow and Brulte 2024), but this data must first be
annotated with the location and type of obstacles in every video frame before being used for
model development (Braun et al. 2019). Moreover, the annotation process has historically
been performed by manual human labor. Given the immense volume of data, annotation
grows tremendously expensive.
1
arXiv:2504.09341v1  [cs.LG]  12 Apr 2025

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
2
Data annotation can be performed by teams within the firms developing the ML models
or outsourced to annotation platforms (Gonzalez-Cabello et al. 2024). There exist different
paradigms on managing annotation depending on the ML problem at hand (Hanbury 2008,
Song et al. 2022, Tan et al. 2024). In this work, we analyze computer vision problems that
require identifying attributes of objects in images, but remark that our results naturally
generalize to other ML tasks. For our setting, annotation involves designing a series of
multiple choice or true/false questions or tasks that can be posed for each image or cropped
segment of an image in the dataset (e.g., ‘is the object in the image a pedestrian?’). These
tasks are assigned—often via randomized matching (Karger et al. 2014)—to a team of
human annotators to complete.
Annotation is manual online labor performed over long hours by workers sometimes
as their primary income source (Horton and Chilton 2010, Berg et al. 2018). Individual
workers may make mistakes in labeling, due to factors such as the complexity or ambi-
guity of the task (e.g., analyzing objects that are partially occluded in images), variable
worker skill levels, and fatigue after working long hours. Given the likelihood for individual
errors, each task is repeated by a set of annotators and their responses are aggregated to
create accurate ‘ground truth’ labels (Karger et al. 2014, Khetan and Oh 2016, Liao et al.
2021). This repetition multiplies the overall cost of labeling a dataset. Consequently, the
firms developing the ML models must balance a tradeoff between label quality and cost,
depending on the downstream application and the acceptable error tolerance of the overall
software. Even well-known benchmark datasets have erroneous labels for between 1 to 10%
of their images; the most famous image classification dataset for example, ImageNet (Deng
et al. 2009), is estimated to have errors on 5.8% of their image labels (Northcutt et al.
2021).
In this paper, we explore the tradeoff between annotation costs, measured by the total
number of annotation tasks completed, and quality, measured by the proportion of labels
that change with more repeated annotations, referred to as repeats. Our approach is
premised on the intuitive notion that conditioned ex post on a task with multiple repeats,
the workers who had submitted different responses from the aggregated answer are giv-
ing unnecessary redundancy for the task. We refer to such responses as minority reports
that contradict the ground truth annotation. We observe that, given an oracle capable
of identifying when an annotator will produce a minority report for an assigned task, we

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
3
can instead re-assign the worker to other tasks. In place of this acausal oracle, we pre-
dict the likelihood of a minority report for each potential task assignment. We then prune
assignments with high predicted probabilities, which incurs some risk of these lower-cost
aggregated labels changing from their counterfactual ground truth values.
We develop our framework in collaboration with Quality Match, a high-quality data
annotation provider. Given a dataset to label, Quality Match’s in-house service determines
an ontology for the dataset, estimates the number of repeated annotations needed for each
annotation task, and assigns these tasks to a pool of annotators. Using Quality Match’s
service, we annotate two datasets for benchmark computer vision problems with 196,446
and 16,000 annotation tasks, respectively (Braun et al. 2019, Alibeigi et al. 2023). The first
dataset is annotated according to Quality Match’s standard operational pipeline where the
number of repeats is dynamically determined between five to 12, while the second dataset
is annotated by a constant number of 11 workers for each task.
For each computer vision problem, we develop a predictive model to estimate the likeli-
hood of a worker to generate a minority report. Our empirical analysis over both datasets
reveals that this likelihood is governed almost entirely via three key factors:
• Image ambiguity: Objects that are partially occluded, in the distance, or blurry,
are more challenging to annotate. There remains a small subset of images for which the
odds of a minority report being generated increase by at least 20×.
• Annotator variability: Worker quality is symmetric with high variance. At worst,
certain workers can increase the odds of producing minority reports by up to 54×.
• Fatigue: Workers behave according to a bathtub curve when subject to long contin-
uous working periods. Workers are more likely to produce minority reports at the start
(i.e., warm-up) and at the end (i.e., exhaustion) of a shift.
Motivated by these empirical insights, we propose a framework to predict, given an
annotation task and worker, the likelihood of yielding a minority report, and prescribe
whether to enable this task to be completed or to remove the assignment, thereby reduc-
ing the total number of annotations requested. Figure 1 visualizes our framework, which
employs a simple model that can be inserted into any existing annotation platform. We
theoretically show that pruning task assignments follows a ‘no free lunch’ principle, where
for any predictive model, pruning always degrades the quality of the dataset by potentially
changing the final aggregated labels from their counterfactual ground truths. Nonetheless,

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
4
Figure 1
Overview of our method. Our prescriptive pruning framework can slot into any annotation pipeline after
tasks are assigned but before they are executed to reduce costs.
our approach can significantly reduce annotation costs at only a marginal drop in dataset
quality. When applied to our datasets, a conservative pruning strategy can prune approx-
imately 22% of the assigned tasks while preserving over 99% of the majority vote labels,
and that an aggressive strategy can prune 60% of the assignments while preserving over
96% of the majority votes.
Our contributions are:
1. We analyze factors affecting erroneous annotations in the labeling of ML data to show
that image ambiguity, worker skill variability, and worker fatigue capture the likelihood of
annotators erring from the majority vote almost completely.
2. We develop a prescriptive framework to forecast in real-time whether an annotator will
disagree with the future crowd decision and determine whether to remove task assignments.
Simulations show that our strategy can yield up to a 60% decrease in the number of
annotations at less than 4% loss in dataset quality.
3. We theoretically analyze this framework to show that while pruning will always lead
to a drop in quality, an accurate predictive model can significantly reduce the total number
of annotations. This further yields rule-of-thumb guidelines for the average number of
repeats needed to annotate a given dataset.
2.
Related literature
Training ML models requires large data sets that are accurately annotated. Nonetheless,
most datasets have some varying noise in their labels (Song et al. 2022, Liao et al. 2024,
Durasov et al. 2024). For instance, classic benchmark datasets such as ImageNet (Deng

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
5
et al. 2009), were constructed using crowd-sourced annotation efforts, and are known to
have errors for approximately 5.8% of the image data points (Northcutt et al. 2021).
ML dataset annotation consists of large operational pipelines that have become key com-
ponents of enterprise ML engineering teams (Dimensional Research 2019). First, individual
tasks for annotating data points are assigned to workers in an online labor pool. While
workforce allocation is a well-studied operational problem (see Bouajaja and Dridi (2017)
for a review) with applications in assembly lines (Vila and Pereira 2014), crowdsourcing
(Wang et al. 2017, Tian et al. 2022, Manshadi and Rodilitz 2022, Fatehi and Wagner 2022),
finance (Stratman et al. 2024), and healthcare (Lanzarone and Matta 2014, Adelman et al.
2024), task assignment for data annotation is most commonly achieved via randomized
matching (Karger et al. 2014). This requires minimal implementation effort, making it
attractive in practice. Once tasks are completed, the labels must be aggregated. The naive
approach to creating accurate ‘ground truth’ datasets is by computing a majority vote
from a group of workers. More sophisticated techniques determine weighted averages by
estimating annotator ability and task difficulty using expectation-maximization (Dawid
and Skene 1979, Raykar et al. 2010, Yin et al. 2021, Palley and Satop¨a¨a 2023), optimiza-
tion (Karger et al. 2014, Khetan and Oh 2016), dynamic policies (Wang et al. 2017), and
end-to-end combined annotation and learning (Rodrigues and Pereira 2018, Tanno et al.
2019, Goh et al. 2023). In contrast to this literature, our prescriptive pruning framework
lies in the interim between tasks being assigned but not completed. Given an arbitrary
assignment of tasks, we predict which task assignments are likely to be redundant and
prune them.
Annotation tasks are relatively low-paying and can be completed quickly, which can lead
crowd-sourced workers to be unengaged, make errors, or potentially ‘cheat’ the system,
for example by giving random answers (Staats and Gino 2012, Karger et al. 2014). A
key challenge remains to identify and prevent such adversarial workers from completing
tasks with erronous labels that poison the aggregated ground truth. Most closely related
to our work is by Jagabathula et al. (2017), who propose several algorithms for filtering
adversarial workers by penalizing the number of times they have previously disagreed with
the majority vote. This filtering can be performed after tasks are completed with the goal
of eventually removing adversarial workers from the labor pool. In contrast, we estimate
the likelihood of a worker disagreeing with the majority in a future task as a function of

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
6
the worker’s latent ‘skill’ level. Rather than removing the worker, our treatment removes
task assignments that are predicted to be unfavorable. In the case where workers are of
extremely low skill, this may automatically prune all assignments and indirectly remove
the worker.
Online labor platforms have enabled on-demand work such as data annotation at massive
scales beyond traditional employment structures (Kittur et al. 2013, Horton and Chilton
2010, Horton 2011). This ‘gig’ workforce faces several ongoing frictions including low pay,
unstable demand, and constrained task deadlines, in particular for data annotation tasks
(Berg et al. 2018, Yin et al. 2018, Gonzalez-Cabello et al. 2024). Managing this workforce
raises new questions about engagement and retention to ensure tasks are completed to
a high degree of quality. For example, game-theoretic models reveal how optimal fees
can balance platform profit with worker participation (Wen and Lin 2016). Moreover,
contract design for online crowdwork is a principal agent problem that can be designed
with incentives to optimize the quality of completed annotation tasks (Kaynar and Siddiq
2023). Most recently, Liu et al. (2024) explore contract mechanisms for data annotation
for large-language models (LLM) in ML. Our work contributes towards quality control in
data annotation gig work by simultaneously exploring task difficulty, worker skills, and
worker fatigue in an easy-to-learn framework that can derive just-in-time insights before
tasks are completed.
Finally, our work is related to the broader empirical literature on worker behavior and
productivity. Factors such as task switching (Jin et al. 2020), work interruption (Gurvich
et al. 2020, Cai et al. 2018), task specialization (Narayanan et al. 2009, Staats and Gino
2012), and prior experience (Kc and Staats 2012) are known to strongly affect worker
productivity in various domains including healthcare, manufacturing, finance, and software
development. The labor in our setting consists primarily of low-skill, repetitive tasks that
are individually completed within seconds. Our empirical analysis demonstrates that in
this online labor setting, variability in the quality of completed tasks depends primarily
on individual worker ability, task difficulty, and worker fatigue, in order of importance.
3.
Setting and data
In this section, we first overview the data annotation workflow for image recognition. We
then introduce our two datasets that have been annotated via Quality Match.

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
7
3.1.
The data annotation pipeline
A standard data annotation pipeline begins by defining the ML task and the characteristics
of the data necessary to train an ML model. This ontology establishes clear guidelines for
labeling and ensuring consistency across annotators. For example to train an ML model
that can detect different types of obstacles observed from an onboard car camera, we may
define the characteristics of pedestrians (i.e., humans with both feet on the ground) to
distinguish them from motorcyclists (i.e., humans with both feet on a two-wheeled vehicle).
A series of multiple choice questions (e.g., “Is the object in the image a pedestrian? Answer
yes/no/can’t solve”) are constructed based on these guidelines. Each question is posed to
the images or even cropped segments of images. We refer to an annotation task as the
tuple of an image crop and a single corresponding question.
Tasks are organized and distributed to a pool of annotators through an online task
assignment system. At Quality Match, this assignment system consists of a dynamic queue
updated daily with the current tasks that must be completed. Annotators have the freedom
to choose their own hours of employment, meaning that at any time, there may be a
random pool of annotators who are servicing the queue. The assignment of a task to an
annotator is referred to as a task instance or a repeat, and is determined randomly. Each
annotator must undergo training and calibration with trial tasks to familiarize themselves
with the guidelines. Moreover, annotators execute these tasks via an online interface that
provides instructions and supporting labeling tools such as zooming in on an image.
Each annotation task is repeated multiple times to obtain a set of responses. Quality
Match employs a majority vote to aggregate these responses and obtain the consensus
ground truth response. We interchange the terms ‘response’—which refers to the multiple
choice answer to the task—and ‘label’—which refers to the object in an image crop as
determined by one or more annotation tasks. There may be repeats where the annotator
submitted a response that differed from the majority vote. We refer to such instances as
minority reports, i.e., disagreements with the ground truth majority.
A core challenge in this pipeline is determining how many repeats should be collected
for each annotation task, since each repeat adds to the queue. A naive approach is to
set a fixed number of repeats for each task, which effectively multiplies the queue length.
Quality Match employs an internal dynamic protocol that estimates for each annotation
task, the sample size needed for a statistically significant determination of the majority

---PAGE---

Liao et al.: Minority Reports: Balancing Cost and Quality in Ground Truth Data Annotation
8
vote (Klugmann et al. 2024). Nonetheless, this determination presents significant redun-
dancy. Effectively, the repeats which yielded minority reports can be viewed as unnecessary
instances on the annotation queue. The goal of our work is to determine just before the
time of service in this queue, whether the task instance is unnecessary and can be pruned.
We may also consider variations of this data annotation pipeline or different ML tasks.
For instance, tasks may be assigned via optimization to workers based on estimated worker
performance. Moreover, label aggregation may involve sophisticated weighing mechanisms.
Our work is agnostic to different assignment or aggregation mechanisms and lies in between
these two stages, thereby allowing easy extension to alternate settings.
3.2.
Datasets
We use two benchmark image recognition datasets, the EuroCity Persons Dataset (ECPD)
(Braun et al. 2019) and the Zenseact Open Dataset (ZOD) (Alibeigi et al. 2023), as a study
setting for annotator performance. ECPD is a public-access dataset containing recorded
videos from the perspective of a front camera on-board vehicles driving in urban traf-
fic environments in 12 European countries. ZOD is a public-access dataset that contains
simultaneous recorded videos of multiple cameras arranged above vehicles driving around
14 European countries.
Both datasets are annotated for object detection tasks. First, the video recordings in
each dataset are split into images (also referred to as frames). There are 47,000 images
in ECPD and over 100,000 images in ZOD. For each image, different objects of interest
are annotated via bounding boxes (also referred to as crops) that describe the coordinates
of a box around each object in the image. ECPD contains bounding boxes for humans,
separated into pedestrians and riders (e.g., on motorbikes, bicycles, wheelchairs). ZOD
includes bounding boxes for several classes including automobiles, bicycles, wheelchairs,
pedestrians, and animals. Figure 2 shows an example of an annotated frame from ECPD.
Table 1 summarizes the key statistics for both datasets.
The original annotator votes for these datasets are not publicly available. Consequently
for each dataset, we introduce new tasks and use the annotation service from Quality
Match to re-annotate these datasets. We focus on the problem of crops containing vul-
nerable road users, i.e. pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists, which are an important
category of objects that must be detected by autonomous vehicle software. For each crop,
we pose different questions which annotators can answer with ‘yes’, ‘no’, or ‘can’t solve’.