Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2019, pages 1471–1480
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2 - June 7, 2019. c⃝2019 Association for Computational Linguistics
1471
Predicting Annotation Difﬁculty to Improve Task Routing and Model
Performance for Biomedical Information Extraction
Yinfei Yang
Google AI
yinfeiy@google.com
Oshin Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
oagarwal@seas.upenn.edu
Chris Tar
Google AI
ctar@google.com
Byron C. Wallace
Northeastern University
b.wallace@northeastern.edu
Ani Nenkova
University of Pennsylvania
nenkova@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
Modern NLP systems require high-quality an-
notated data. In specialized domains, expert
annotations may be prohibitively expensive.
An alternative is to rely on crowdsourcing to
reduce costs at the risk of introducing noise. In
this paper we demonstrate that directly model-
ing instance difﬁculty can be used to improve
model performance, and to route instances to
appropriate annotators. Our difﬁculty predic-
tion model combines two learned representa-
tions: a ‘universal’ encoder trained on out-of-
domain data, and a task-speciﬁc encoder. Ex-
periments on a complex biomedical informa-
tion extraction task using expert and lay anno-
tators show that: (i) simply excluding from the
training data instances predicted to be difﬁcult
yields a small boost in performance; (ii) us-
ing difﬁculty scores to weight instances during
training provides further, consistent gains; (iii)
assigning instances predicted to be difﬁcult to
domain experts is an effective strategy for task
routing. Our experiments conﬁrm the expec-
tation that for specialized tasks expert annota-
tions are higher quality than crowd labels, and
hence preferable to obtain if practical. More-
over, augmenting small amounts of expert data
with a larger set of lay annotations leads to fur-
ther improvements in model performance.
1
Introduction
Assembling training corpora of annotated natural
language examples in specialized domains such
as biomedicine poses considerable challenges. Ex-
perts with the requisite domain knowledge to per-
form high-quality annotation tend to be expen-
sive, while lay annotators may not have the nec-
essary knowledge to provide high-quality annota-
tions. A practical approach for collecting a suf-
ﬁciently large corpus would be to use crowd-
sourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk
(MTurk). However, crowd workers in general are
likely to provide noisy annotations
(Abad and
Moschitti, 2016; Plank et al., 2014; Alonso et al.,
2015), an issue exacerbated by the technical na-
ture of specialized content. Some of this noise may
reﬂect worker quality and can be modeled (Abad
and Moschitti, 2016; Plank et al., 2014; Cohn and
Specia, 2013; Nguyen et al., 2017), but for some
instances lay people may simply lack the domain
knowledge to provide useful annotation.
In this paper we report experiments on the
EBM-NLP corpus comprising crowdsourced an-
notations of medical literature (Nye et al., 2018).
We operationalize the concept of annotation dif-
ﬁculty and show how it can be exploited during
training to improve information extraction mod-
els. We then obtain expert annotations for the ab-
stracts predicted to be most difﬁcult, as well as for
a similar number of randomly selected abstracts.
The annotation of highly specialized data and the
use of lay and expert annotators allow us to exam-
ine the following key questions related to lay and
expert annotations in specialized domains:
Can we predict item difﬁculty? We deﬁne a
training instance as difﬁcult if a lay annotator or
an automated model disagree on its labeling. We
show that difﬁculty can be predicted, and that it
is distinct from inter-annotator agreement. Further,
such predictions can be used during training to im-
prove information extraction models.
Are there systematic differences between expert
and lay annotations? We observe decidedly lower
agreement between lay workers as compared to
domain experts. Lay annotations have high preci-
sion but low recall with respect to expert annota-

---PAGE---

1472
tions in the new data that we collected. More gen-
erally, we expect lay annotations to be lower qual-
ity, which may translate to lower precision, recall,
or both, compared to expert annotations.
Can one rely solely on lay annotations? Rea-
sonable models can be trained using lay anno-
tations alone, but similar performance can be
achieved using markedly less expert data. This
suggests that the optimal ratio of expert to crowd
annotations for specialized tasks will depend on
the cost and availability of domain experts. Expert
annotations are preferable whenever its collection
is practical. But in real-world settings, a combi-
nation of expert and lay annotations is better than
using lay data alone.
Does it matter what data is annotated by ex-
perts? We demonstrate that a system trained on
combined data achieves better predictive perfor-
mance when experts annotate difﬁcult examples
rather than instances selected at i.i.d. random.
Our contributions in this work are summarized
as follows. We deﬁne a task difﬁculty prediction
task and show how this is related to, but distinct
from, inter-worker agreement. We introduce a new
model for difﬁculty prediction combining learned
representations induced via a pre-trained ‘univer-
sal’ sentence encoder (Cer et al., 2018), and a sen-
tence encoder learned from scratch for this task.
We show that predicting annotation difﬁculty can
be used to improve the task routing and model per-
formance for a biomedical information extraction
task. Our results open up a new direction for en-
suring corpus quality. We believe that item difﬁ-
culty prediction will likely be useful in other, non-
specialized tasks as well, and that the most ef-
fective data collection in specialized domains re-
quires research addressing the fundamental ques-
tions we examine here.
2
Related Work
Crowdsourcing annotation is now a well-studied
problem (Snow et al., 2008; Abad and Moschitti,
2016; Plank et al., 2014; Alonso et al., 2015). Due
to the noise inherent in such annotations, there
have also been considerable efforts to develop ag-
gregation models that minimize noise (Abad and
Moschitti, 2016; Plank et al., 2014; Cohn and Spe-
cia, 2013; Nguyen et al., 2017).
There are also several surveys of crowdsourcing
in biomedicine speciﬁcally (Good and Su, 2013;
Khare et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2017). Some work
in this space has contrasted model performance
achieved using expert vs. crowd annotated training
data (Zhai et al., 2013; Cocos et al., 2017; Dumi-
trache et al., 2018). Dumitrache et al. (2018) con-
cluded that performance is similar under these su-
pervision types, ﬁnding no clear advantage from
using expert annotators. This differs from our ﬁnd-
ings, perhaps owing to differences in design. The
experts we used already hold advanced medical
degrees, for instance, while those in prior work
were medical students. Furthermore, the task con-
sidered here would appear to be of greater difﬁ-
culty: even a system trained on ∼5k instances per-
forms reasonably, but far from perfect. By con-
trast, in some of the prior work where experts and
crowd annotations were deemed equivalent, a clas-
siﬁer trained on 300 examples can achieve very
high accuracy (Cocos et al., 2017).
More relevant to this paper, prior work has in-
vestigated methods for ‘task routing’ in active
learning scenarios in which supervision is pro-
vided by heterogeneous labelers with varying lev-
els of expertise (Yan et al., 2011; Donmez and Car-
bonell, 2008; Nguyen et al., 2015; Wallace et al.,
2011; Yan et al., 2011). The related question of
whether effort is better spent collecting additional
annotations for already labeled (but potentially
noisily so) examples or novel instances has also
been addressed (Sheng et al., 2008). What distin-
guishes the work here is our focus on providing an
operational deﬁnition of instance difﬁculty, show-
ing that this can be predicted, and then using this
to inform task routing.
3
Application Domain
Our speciﬁc application concerns annotating ab-
stracts of articles that describe the conduct and re-
sults of randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Ex-
perimentation in this domain has become easy
with the recent release of the EBM-NLP (Nye
et al., 2018) corpus, which includes a reasonably
large training dataset annotated via crowdsourc-
ing, and a modest test set labeled by individuals
with advanced medical training. More speciﬁcally,
the training set comprises 4,741 medical article
abstracts with crowdsourced annotations indicat-
ing snippets (sequences) that describe the Partic-
ipants (P), Interventions (I), and Outcome (O) el-
ements of the respective RCT, and the test set is
composed of 191 abstracts with P, I, O sequence
annotations from three medical experts.

---PAGE---

1473
Difﬁcult Sentences
[Population]
1. Primary RP were screened and assigned to either the nifedipine SR group (Group N) or the Ginkgo biloba extract group
(Group G) in the ratio of 2:1 .
2. A positive correlation was found for all methods in the controls (r=0.83-0.94) and RA patients (r=0.51-0.69).
[Interventions/Comparators]
1. They were all enrolled in mainstream compulsory education.
2. RA patients reported that they were less sedentary and engaged in more higher intensity PA than what was objectively
assessed.
[Outcomes]
1. To develop a cycle - based risk prediction model for neutropenic complications (NC) during chemotherapy with doxoru-
bicin (DOX) or a pegy lated liposomal formulation (PLD) for patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC).
2. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term safety and efﬁcacy of risperidone.
Easy Sentences
[Population]
1. A prospective study in 80 patients was carried out.
2. We studied 200 women aged 35 years and older who had a family history of breast cancer in a ﬁrst-degree relative.
[Interventions/Comparators]
1. Hormonal contraceptives are used widely but their effects on HIV-1 risk are unclear.
2. In the second group, custom - ﬁt MRI - based pin guides were used.
[Outcomes]
1. Extrapyramidal AEs were reported in 6(8%) patients.
2. The overall progression - free survival rates were similar between the two arms (P=.095).
Table 1: Example sentences are difﬁcult or easy to annotate for crowd workers. The underlined text are reference
annotations from domain experts.
Table 1 shows an example of difﬁcult and easy
examples according to our deﬁnition of difﬁculty.
The underlined text demarcates the (consensus)
reference label provided by domain experts. In the
difﬁcult examples, crowd workers marked text dis-
tinct from these reference annotations; whereas in
the easy cases they reproduced them with reason-
able ﬁdelity. The difﬁcult sentences usually exhibit
complicated structure and feature jargon.
An abstract may contain some ‘easy’ and some
‘difﬁcult’ sentences. We thus perform our analysis
at the sentence level. We split abstracts into sen-
tences using spaCy.1 We excluded sentences that
comprise fewer than two tokens, as these are likely
an artifact of errors in sentence splitting. In total,
this resulted in 57,505 and 2,428 sentences in the
train and test set abstracts, respectively.
4
Quantifying Task Difﬁculty
The test set includes annotations from both crowd
workers and domain experts. We treat the latter as
ground truth and then deﬁne the difﬁculty of sen-
tences in terms of the observed agreement between
expert and lay annotators. Formally, for annotation
1https://spacy.io/
task t and instance i:
Difﬁcultyti =
Pn
j=1 f(labelij, yi)
n
(1)
where f is a scoring function that measures the
quality of the label from worker j for sentence i,
as compared to a ground truth annotation, yi. The
difﬁculty score of sentence i is taken as an average
over the scores for all n layworkers. We use Spear-
mans’ correlation coefﬁcient as a scoring function.
Speciﬁcally, for each sentence we create two vec-
tors comprising counts of how many times each
token was annotated by crowd and expert workers,
respectively, and calculate the correlation between
these. Sentences with no labels are treated as max-
imally easy; those with only either crowd worker
or expert label(s) are assumed maximally difﬁcult.
The training set contains only crowdsourced an-
notations. To label the training data, we use a 10-
fold validation like setting. We iteratively retrain
the LSTM-CRF-Pattern sequence tagger of Patel
et al. (2018) on 9 folds of the training data and
use that trained model to predict labels for the
10th. In this way we obtain predictions on the full
training set. We then use predicted spans as proxy
‘ground truth’ annotations to calculate the difﬁ-

---PAGE---

1474
0
1
2
3
4
Probability Density of Difficulty Scores
Participants Mean: 0.500; Std: 0.296
0
1
2
3
4
Intervention Mean: 0.562; Std: 0.279
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Scores
0
1
2
3
4
Outcome Mean: 0.576; Std: 0.279
Figure 1: Distributions of difﬁculty scores over all sen-
tences that contain any span annotations
culty score of sentences as described above; we
normalize these to the [0, 1] interval. We validate
this approximation by comparing the proxy scores
against reference scores over the test set, the Pear-
son’s correlation coefﬁcients are 0.57 for Popula-
tion, 0.71 for Intervention and 0.68 for Outcome.
There exist many sentences that contain nei-
ther manual nor predicted annotations. We treat
these as maximally easy sentences (with difﬁculty
scores of 0). Such sentences comprise 51%, 42%
and 36% for Population, Interventions and Out-
comes data respectively, indicating that it is eas-
ier to identify sentences that have no Population
spans, but harder to identify sentences that have no
Interventions or Outcomes spans. This is intuitive
as descriptions of the latter two tend to be more
technical and dense with medical jargon.
We show the distribution of the automatically
labeled scores for sentences that do contain spans
in Figure 1. The mean of the Population (P) sen-
tence scores is signiﬁcantly lower than that for
other types of sentences (I and O), again indicat-
ing that they are easier on average to annotate.
This aligns with a previous ﬁnding that annotat-
ing Interventions and Outcomes is more difﬁcult
than annotating Participants (Nye et al., 2018).
Many sentences contain spans tagged by the
LSTM-CRF-Pattern model, but missed by all
crowd workers, resulting in a maximally difﬁcult
score (1). Inspection of such sentences revealed
that some are truly difﬁcult examples, but others
are tagging model errors. In either case, such sen-
tences have confused workers and/or the model,
and so we retain them all as ‘difﬁcult’ sentences.
Content describing the P, I and O, respectively,
is quite different. As such, one sentence usually
contains (at most) only one of these three content
types. We thus treat difﬁculty prediction for the re-
Workers
P
I
O
crowd workers
0.52
0.43
0.41
domain experts
0.74
0.68
0.57
Table 2: Average inter-worker agreement.
spective label types as separate tasks.
5
Difﬁculty is not Worker Agreement
Our deﬁnition of difﬁculty is derived from agree-
ment between expert and crowd annotations for
the test data, and agreement between a predictive
model and crowd annotations in the training data.
It is reasonable to ask if these measures are re-
lated to inter-annotator agreement, a metric often
used in language technology research to identify
ambiguous or difﬁcult items. Here we explicitly
verify that our deﬁnition of difﬁculty only weakly
correlates with inter-annotator agreement.
We calculate inter-worker agreement between
crowd and expert annotators using Spearman’s
correlation coefﬁcient. As shown in Table 2, av-
erage agreement between domain experts are con-
siderably higher than agreements between crowd
workers for all three label types. This is a clear in-
dication that the crowd annotations are noisier.
Furthermore, we compare the correlation be-
tween inter-annotator agreement and difﬁculty
scores in the training data. Given that the major-
ity of sentences do not contain a PICO span, we
only include in these calculations those that con-
tain a reference label. Pearson’s r are 0.34, 0.30
and 0.31 for P, I and O, respectively, conﬁrming
that inter-worker agreement and our proposed dif-
ﬁculty score are quite distinct.
6
Predicting Annotation Difﬁculty
We treat difﬁculty prediction as a regression prob-
lem, and propose and evaluate neural model vari-
ants for the task. We ﬁrst train RNN (Chung et al.,
2014) and CNN (Kim, 2014) models.
We also use the universal sentence encoder
(USE) (Cer et al., 2018) to induce sentence rep-
resentations, and train a model using these as fea-
tures. Following (Cer et al., 2018), we then ex-
periment with an ensemble model that combines
the ‘universal’ and task-speciﬁc representations to
predict annotation difﬁculty. We expect these uni-
versal embeddings to capture general, high-level
semantics, and the task speciﬁc representations to
capture more granular information. Figure 2 de-

---PAGE---

1475
Figure 2: Model architecture.
picts the model architecture. Sentences are fed
into both the universal sentence encoder and, sepa-
rately, a task speciﬁc neural encoder, yielding two
representations. We concatenate these and pass the
combined vector to the regression layer.
6.1
Experimental Setup and Results
We trained models for each label type separately.
Word embeddings were initialized to 300d GloVe
vectors (Pennington et al., 2014) trained on com-
mon crawl data;2 these are ﬁne-tuned during train-
ing. We used the Adam optimizer (Kingma and
Ba, 2014) with learning rate and decay set to 0.001
and 0.99, respectively. We used batch sizes of 16.
We used the large version of the universal sen-
tence encoder3 with a transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017). We did not update the pretrained sentence
encoder parameters during training. All hyper-
paramaters for all models (including hidden lay-
ers, hidden sizes, and dropout) were tuned using
Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017) via 10-fold cross val-
idation on the training set maximizing for F1.4
As a baseline, we also trained a linear Support-
Vector Regression (Fan et al., 2008) model on n-
gram features (n ranges from 1 to 3).5
Table 3 reports Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
between the predictions with each of the neu-
ral models and the ground truth difﬁculty scores.
Rows 1-4 correspond to individual models, and
row 5 reports the ensemble performance. Columns
correspond to label type. Results from all mod-
els outperform the baseline SVR model: Pearson’s
2http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.
840B.300d.zip
3https://tfhub.dev/google/
universal-sentence-encoder-large/3
4This performs random search over the number of hidden
layers (1-5), hidden sizes (128-1024), and dropout (0.1- 0.5).
5We perform gridsearch over the hyperparameter C.
P
I
O
NGRAM+SVR
0.455
0.311
0.541
RNN
0.521
0.555
0.601
CNN
0.470
0.522
0.550
USE
0.492
0.518
0.580
USE+RNN
0.550
0.604
0.622
Table 3: Pearson correlation coefﬁcients of sentence
difﬁculty predictions.
correlation coefﬁcients range from 0.550 to 0.622.
The regression correlations are the lowest.
The RNN model realizes the strongest per-
formance among the stand-alone (non-ensemble)
models, outperforming variants that exploit CNN
and USE representations. Combining the RNN
and USE further improves results. We hypothesize
that this is due to complementary sentence infor-
mation encoded in universal representations.
For all models, correlations for Intervention and
Outcomes are higher than for Population, which is
expected given the difﬁculty distributions in Fig-
ure 1. In these, the sentences are more uniformly
distributed, with a fair number of difﬁcult and eas-
ier sentences. By contrast, in Population there are
a greater number of easy sentences and consid-
erably fewer difﬁcult sentences, which makes the
difﬁculty ranking task particularly challenging.
7
Better IE with Difﬁculty Prediction
We next present experiments in which we attempt
to use the predicted difﬁculty during training to
improve models for information extraction of de-
scriptions of Population, Interventions and Out-
comes from medical article abstracts. We investi-
gate two uses: (1) simply removing the most dif-
ﬁcult sentences from the training set, and, (2) re-
weighting the most difﬁcult sentences.
We again use LSTM-CRF-Pattern as the base
model and experimenting on the EBM-NLP cor-
pus (Nye et al., 2018). This is trained on either (1)
the training set with difﬁcult sentences removed,
or (2) the full training set but with instances re-
weighted in proportion to their predicted difﬁculty
score. Following (Nye et al., 2018), we use the
Adam optimizer with learning rate of 0.001, de-
cay 0.9, batch size 20 and dropout 0.5. We use
pretrained 200d GloVe vectors (Pennington et al.,
2014)6 to initialize word embeddings, and use
6http://nlp.stanford.edu/data/glove.
6B.zip

---PAGE---

1476
Model
Precision
Recall
F1
P
I
O
P
I
O
P
I
O
Base model
81.54
81.99
78.01
64.22
54.19
54.84
71.85
65.25
64.40
Re-weight by agreement
78.63
82.24
82.19
66.47
54.45
55.22
72.04
65.53
66.06
Re-weight by difﬁculty
79.57
74.69
73.92
70.31
63.71
64.96
74.65
68.76
69.15
Table 4: Medical IE performance by re-weighting sentences according to predicted agreement or difﬁculty scores.
100d hidden char representations. Each word is
thus represented with 300 dimensions in total. The
hidden size is 100 for the LSTM in the character
representation component, and 200 for the LSTM
in the information extraction component. We train
for 15 epochs, saving parameters that achieve the
best F1 score on a nested development set.
7.1
Removing Difﬁcult Examples
We ﬁrst evaluate changes in performance induced
by training the sequence labeling model using less
data by removing difﬁcult sentences prior to train-
ing. The hypothesis here is that these difﬁcult in-
stances are likely to introduce more noise than
signal. We used a cross-fold approach to predict
sentence difﬁculties, training on 9/10ths of the
data and scoring the remaining 1/10th at a time.
We then sorted sentences by predicted difﬁculty
scores, and experimented with removing increas-
ing numbers of these (in order of difﬁculty) prior
to training the LSTM-CRF-Pattern model.
Figure 3 shows the results achieved by the
LSTM-CRF-Pattern model after discarding in-
creasing amounts of the training data: the x and
y axes correspond to the the percentage of data
removed and F1 scores, respectively. We contrast
removing sentences predicted to be difﬁcult with
removing them (a) randomly (i.i.d.), and, (b) in
inverse order of predicted inter-annotator agree-
ment. The agreement prediction model is trained
exactly the same like difﬁcult prediction model,
with simply changing the difﬁcult score to an-
notation agreement. F1 scores actually improve
(marginally) when we remove the most difﬁcult
sentences, up until we drop 4% of the data for Pop-
ulation and Interventions, and 6% for Outcomes.
Removing training points at i.i.d. random degrades
performance, as expected. Removing sentences in
order of disagreement seems to have similar effect
as removing them by difﬁculty score when remov-
ing small amount of the data, but the F1 scores
drop much faster when removing more data. These
ﬁndings indicate that sentences predicted to be dif-
70.0
70.5
71.0
71.5
72.0
72.5
73.0
73.5
74.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
62.0
62.5
63.0
63.5
64.0
64.5
65.0
65.5
Percent of data dropped
F1 score
Biomedical IE performance (F1)
P Difficulty
P Agreement
P Random
I Difficulty
I Agreement
I Random
O Difficulty
O Agreement
O Random
Figure 3: F1 scores achieved when removing increas-
ingly large fractions of the training data.
ﬁcult are indeed noisy, to the extent that they do
not seem to provide the model useful signal.
7.2
Re-weighting by Difﬁculty
We showed above that removing a small number
of the most difﬁcult sentences does not harm, and
in fact modestly improves, medical IE model per-
formance. However, using the available data we
are unable to test if this will be useful in practice,
as we would need additional data to determine
how many difﬁcult sentences should be dropped.
We instead explore an alternative, practical
means of exploiting difﬁculty predictions: we re-
weight sentences during training inversely to their
predicted difﬁculty. Formally, we weight sentence
i with difﬁculty scores above τ according to: 1−a·
(di−τ)/(1−τ), where di is the difﬁculty score for
sentence i, and a is a parameter codifying the min-
imum weight value. We set τ to 0.8 so as to only
re-weight sentences with difﬁculty in the top 20th
percentile, and we set a to 0.5. The re-weighting
is equivalent to down-sampling the difﬁcult sen-
tences. LSTM-CRF-Pattern is our base model.
Table 4 reports the precision, recall and F1
achieved both with and without sentence re-
weighting. Re-weighting improves all metrics

---PAGE---

1477
modestly but consistently. All F1 differences are
statistically signiﬁcant under a sign test (p <
0.01). The model with best precision is differ-
ent for Patient, Intervention and Outcome labels.
However re-weighting by difﬁculty does consis-
tently yield the best recall for all three extraction
types, with the most notable improvement for I
and O, where recall improved by 10 percentage
points. This performance increase translated to im-
provements in F1 across all types, as compared to
the base model and to re-weighting by agreement.
8
Involving Expert Annotators
The preceding experiments demonstrate that re-
weighting difﬁcult sentences annotated by the
crowd generally improves the extraction models.
Presumably the performance is inﬂuenced by the
annotation quality.
We now examine the possibility that the higher
quality and more consistent annotations of do-
main experts on the difﬁcult instances will bene-
ﬁt the extraction model. This simulates an annota-
tion strategy in which we route difﬁcult instances
to domain experts and easier ones to crowd anno-
tators. We also contrast the value of difﬁcult data
to that of an i.i.d. random sample of the same size,
both annotated by experts.
8.1
Expert annotations of Random and
Difﬁcult Instances
We re-annotate by experts a subset of most dif-
ﬁcult instances and the same number of random
instances. As collecting annotations from experts
is slow and expensive, we only re-annotate the
difﬁcult instances for the interventions extraction
task. We re-annotate the abstracts which cover
the sentences with predicted difﬁculty scores in
the top 5 percentile. We rank the abstracts from
the training set by the count of difﬁcult sen-
tences, and re-annotate the abstracts that con-
tain the most difﬁcult sentences. Constrained
by time and budget, we select only 2000 ab-
stracts for re-annotation; 1000 of these are top-
ranked, and 1000 are randomly sampled. This re-
annotation cost $3,000. We have released the new
annotation data at: https://github.com/
bepnye/EBM-NLP.
Following (Nye et al., 2018), we recruited ﬁve
medical experts via Up-work7 with advanced med-
ical training and strong technical reading/writing
7https://www.upwork.com
skills. The expert annotator were asked to read
the entire abstract and highlight, using the BRAT
toolkit (Stenetorp et al., 2012), all spans describ-
ing medical Interventions. Each abstract is only
annotated by one expert. We examined 30 re-
annotated abstracts to ensure the annotation qual-
ity before hiring the annotator.
Table 5 presents the results of LSTM-CRF-
Pattern model trained on the reannotated difﬁcult
subset and the random subset. The ﬁrst two rows
show the results for models trained with expert an-
notations. The model trained on random data has
a slightly better F1 than that trained on the same
amount of difﬁcult data. The model trained on ran-
dom data has higher precision but lower recall.
Rows 3 and 4 list the results for models trained
on the same data but with crowd annotation. Mod-
els trained with expert-annotated data are clearly
superior to those trained with crowd labels with
respect to F1, indicating that the experts produced
higher quality annotations. For crowdsourced an-
notations, training the model with data sampled at
i.i.d. random achieves 2% higher F1 than when
difﬁcult instances are used. When expert annota-
tions are used, this difference is less than 1%. This
trend in performance may be explained by differ-
ences in annotation quality: the randomly sampled
set was more consistently annotated by both ex-
perts and crowd because the difﬁcult set is harder.
However, in both cases expert annotations are bet-
ter, with a bigger difference between the expert
and crowd models on the difﬁcult set.
The last row is the model trained on all 5k
abstracts with crowd annotations. Its F1 score is
lower than either expert model trained on only
20% of data, suggesting that expert annotations
should be collected whenever possible. Again the
crowd model on complete data has higher pre-
cision than expert models but its recall is much
lower.
8.2
Routing To Experts or Crowd
So far a system was trained on one type of data, ei-
ther labeled by crowd or experts. We now examine
the performance of a system trained on data that
was routed to either experts or crowd annotators
depending on their predicted difﬁcult. Given the
results presented so far mixing annotators may be
beneﬁcial given their respective trade-offs of pre-
cision and recall. We use the annotations from ex-
perts for an abstract if it exists otherwise use crowd

---PAGE---

1478
Precision
Recall
F1
Difﬁcult-Expert
68.46
65.06
66.72
Random-Expert
70.84
63.46
67.04
Difﬁcult-Crowd
83.68
44.63
58.45
Random-Crowd
78.55
49.23
60.52
Base (All-Crowd)
81.99
54.19
65.25
Table 5: Interventions IE model performance trained
crowd or expert. The ﬁrst four models are trained with
a subset of 1k abstracts and the base model is trained
with all 5k abstracts.
Precision
Recall
F1
(D)ifﬁcult-Expert
68.46
65.06
66.72
(R)andom-Expert
70.84
63.46
67.04
D+R
68.57
67.54
69.62
D+Other
83.55
60.73
70.33
R+Other
85.10
57.08
68.34
D+R+Other
82.19
61.88
70.60
Table 6: Interventions IE model performance trained by
mixing annotations from experts and crowd workers.
[D]: Difﬁcult-Expert; [R]: Random-Expert; [Other]:
the rest of the abstracts with crowd annotation only.
annotations. The results are presented in Table 6.
Rows 1 and 2 repeat the performance of the
models trained on difﬁcult subset and random sub-
set with expert annotations only respectively. The
third row is the model trained by combining difﬁ-
cult and random subsets with expert annotations.
There are around 250 abstracts in the overlap of
these two sets, so there are total 1.75k abstracts
used for training the D+R model. Rows 4 to 6 are
the models trained on all 5k abstracts with mixed
annotations, where Other means the rest of the ab-
stracts with crowd annotation only.
The results show adding more training data with
crowd annotation still improves at least 1 point F1
score in all three extraction tasks. The improve-
ment when the difﬁcult subset with expert anno-
tations is mixed with the remaining crowd anno-
tation is 3.5 F1 score, much larger than when a
random set of expert annotations are added. The
model trained with re-annotating the difﬁcult sub-
set (D+Other) also outperforms the model with
re-annotating the random subset (R+Other) by 2
points in F1. The model trained with re-annotating
both of difﬁcult and random subsets (D+R+Other),
however, achieves only marginally higher F1 than
the model trained with the re-annotated difﬁcult
subset (D+Other).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of most difficult articles reannotated by expert
50
60
70
80
90
100
Metrics
Biomedical IE performance for Intervention
Precision
Recall
F1
Figure 4: Precision/Recall/F1 as a function of the num-
ber of articles re-annotated by expert, in decreasing or-
der of difﬁculty.
In sum, the results clearly indicate that mixing
expert and crowd annotations leads to better mod-
els than using solely crowd data, and better than
using expert data alone. More importantly, there
is greater gain in performance when instances are
routed according to difﬁculty, as compared to ran-
domly selecting the data for expert annotators.
These ﬁndings align with our motivating hypothe-
sis that annotation quality for difﬁcult instances is
important for ﬁnal model performance. They also
indicate that mixing annotations from expert and
crowd could be an effective way to achieve accept-
able model performance given a limited budget.
8.3
How Many Expert Annotations?
We established that crowd annotation are still use-
ful in supplementing expert annotations for med-
ical IE. Obtaining expert annotations for the one
thousand most difﬁcult instances greatly improved
the model performance. However the choice of
how many difﬁcult instances to annotate was an
uninformed choice. Here we check if less ex-
pert data would have yielded similar gains. Future
work will need to address how best to choose this
parameter for a routing system.
We simulate a routing scenario in which we
send consecutive batches of the most difﬁcult ex-
amples to the experts for annotation. We track
changes in performance as we increase the num-
ber of most-difﬁcult-articles sent to domain ex-
perts. As shown in Figure 4, adding expert anno-
tations for difﬁcult articles consistently increases
F1 scores. The performance gain is mostly from
increased recall; the precision changes only a bit