An Interactive Method to Improve Crowdsourced Annotations
Shixia Liu, Changjian Chen, Yafeng Lu, Fangxin Ouyang, Bin Wang
A
D
(e)
(c)
H
(b)
E
F
G
(a)
(d)
B
C
J
I
Fig. 1. LabelInspect: (a) the confusion visualization to reveal the confusion degree between different classes; (b) the instance
visualization to illustrate the uncertain labels in context; (c) the worker visualization to demonstrate worker reliability; (d) the validation
trail to display the number of validated and inﬂuenced instances at each validation step; (e) images.
Abstract— In order to effectively infer correct labels from noisy crowdsourced annotations, learning-from-crowds models have
introduced expert validation. However, little research has been done on facilitating the validation procedure. In this paper, we propose
an interactive method to assist experts in verifying uncertain instance labels and unreliable workers. Given the instance labels and
worker reliability inferred from a learning-from-crowds model, candidate instances and workers are selected for expert validation. The
inﬂuence of veriﬁed results is propagated to relevant instances and workers through the learning-from-crowds model. To facilitate
the validation of annotations, we have developed a confusion visualization to indicate the confusing classes for further exploration,
a constrained projection method to show the uncertain labels in context, and a scatter-plot-based visualization to illustrate worker
reliability. The three visualizations are tightly integrated with the learning-from-crowds model to provide an iterative and progressive
environment for data validation. Two case studies were conducted that demonstrate our approach offers an efﬁcient method for
validating and improving crowdsourced annotations.
Index Terms—Crowdsourcing, learning-from-crowds, interactive visualization, focus + context
1
INTRODUCTION
The quality of training data has proven to be a critical factor for the
success of supervised and semi-supervised learning [36, 38, 43, 57].
However, labeling a large dataset is expensive and demanding [54].
Therefore, researchers resort to crowdsourcing, which distributes micro
labeling tasks to crowds, in order to acquire labeled data [36, 57]. This
• S. Liu, C. Chen, F. Ouyang, and B. Wang are with School of Software,
Tsinghua University. Email: {shixia, wangbins}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {ccj17,
oyfx15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.
• Y. Lu is with Arizona State University. Email: Lu.Yafeng@asu.edu.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx
mechanism, while being efﬁcient and cost-effective, often falls short of
high quality results when the task is complicated and requires proven
skills or specialties. As a result, crowdsourced annotations may be
noisy and poor in quality and usually require additional validation [58].
Correspondingly, there have been some initial efforts to introduce
additional expert labels into learning-from-crowds algorithms [27, 36].
Although the performance of the aforementioned methods repre-
sents the state-of-the-art for improving crowdsourced labels, they use
trusted labels without considering the effort and cost of acquiring them.
Data scientists (expert labelers) often have to spend signiﬁcant time
validating the data for better model accuracy, especially when judging
the reliability of a worker or evaluating which veriﬁcations can bring in
a relatively large gain. Moreover, for objects that are difﬁcult to distin-
guish, data scientists need to consult domain experts who are familiar
with the ﬁeld. Generally, difﬁculties arise from: (1) Two categories
of highly similar-looking objects, for example, the Irish Wolfhound

---PAGE---

Fig. 2.
Objects that are hard to distinguish:
(a) Irish Wolfhound;
(b)Scottish Deerhound; (c) house sparrow; (d) tree sparrow.
and Scottish Deerhound in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b); (2) the key features
for differentiating various objects are partially hidden, for example, in
Figs. 2(c) and 2(d), the key features to distinguish these two types of
sparrows are the colors of the crown and cheek, part of which is hidden
in these two images; (3) some noisy images, which do not belong in the
categories of interest, are mixed into the dataset, for example, an image
with a Spanish sparrow is contained in the dataset of the house sparrow
and tree sparrow. To support an efﬁcient and effective veriﬁcation, it
is necessary to better illustrate the annotation results and minimize the
workload of both data scientists and domain experts. However, little
work has been done to explore a method of acquiring expert valida-
tion efﬁciently and how to take advantage of such feedback for further
annotation improvement.
To facilitate the validation of crowdsourced data we have developed
an interactive visual analytics tool, LabelInspect, to improve the anno-
tated results from crowdsourcing. A demo of the prototype is available
at http://visgroup.thss.tsinghua.edu.cn/label.
LabelInspect combines a learning-from-crowds model [36] with
interactive visualizations to provide experts quick access to the most
uncertain instance labels and unreliable workers for veriﬁcation.
Expert veriﬁcations of instance labels and spammers mutually
inﬂuence each other by the mutual reinforcement graph model
[18, 37], and are propagated to other instances and workers using the
learning-from-crowds model [36]. LabelInspect includes a confusion
visualization, an instance visualization, and a worker visualization as
its main visualizations (Fig. 1). The confusion visualization employs a
confusion matrix to measure the confusion rate between classes. In the
instance visualization, a novel constrained t-SNE projection is proposed
in an attempt to show the uncertain labels in the context of other
relevant instances and reveal their inﬂuence on each other based on
similarities. In the worker visualization, which is utilized to illustrate
the reliability of the workers, we propose a class-level spammer score
calculation algorithm and combine it with a scatter plot. The three
visualizations are tightly coordinated through the underlying models
to reﬂect the validation effects on the relevant instances and workers.
In summary, the main contributions of our work are:
• A visual analytics tool that allows data scientists to verify crowd-
sourced instance labels and unreliable workers in a convenient
and fast manner.
• An iterative and progressive veriﬁcation procedure that prop-
agates the inﬂuence of expert validations on both instance labels
and worker reliabilities to recommend the most informative ones
for further veriﬁcation. Results have demonstrated a large perfor-
mance improvement.
• A novel instance visualization based on a well-formulated con-
strained t-SNE, a worker visualization conveying both global
and partial spammer behaviors, and a confusion visualization.
These visualizations work together to effectively identify the most
informative instances and most unreliable workers, and illustrate
the inﬂuence of each veriﬁcation on other instances and workers.
2
RELATED WORK
Our work is related to integrating machine learning techniques into
visual analytics [14, 20, 38, 39, 42, 55, 63], in particular, combining
interactive visualization with learning techniques to improve data qual-
ity. In the ﬁeld of visualization, many methods have been proposed to
obtain high-quality data. Most existing relevant work can be classiﬁed
into three branches: visual data processing, visual data retrieval, and
interactive labeling.
Visual data processing. To support data processing, Kandel et al. [30]
proposed Wrangler, which is a visual analytics system focusing on
creating data transformations. Maciejewski et al. [47] employed the
Box-Cox transformation to transform data into the best normalized
distribution for effective visualization and analysis. Other than data
transformation, some methods have focused on anomaly detection and
outlier removal. For example, the system developed by Kandel et
al., Proﬁler [31], coupled automated anomaly detection with linked
summary visualizations and interactive data exploration to help ana-
lysts assess data quality. Hao et al. [22] supported noise removal prior
to building prediction models for seasonal time series data. Wilkin-
son [61] developed a distributed algorithm for detecting outliers in big
data and visually illustrated the outliers for further inspection. In terms
of crowdsourced data, Willett et al. [62] introduced a crowd-assisted
clustering method to identify and consolidate redundant responses. Park
et al. [50] developed a visual analytics platform to analyze medical
crowdsourced data. In contrast to the above visual data processing
techniques, LabelInspect considers the relationship between worker
reliability and instance label uncertainty, and integrates the mutual rein-
forcement graph model and learning-from-crowds model to propagate
expert veriﬁcations in different phases.
Visual data retrieval. Data retrieval is an effective way to obtain data
of interest for data-related applications. Several methods have been pro-
posed for visual data retrieval. For example, Krause et al. [34] presented
a visual analytics system, COQUITO, which supports cohort construc-
tion by iteratively updating queries through a visual interface. Liu et
al. [37] developed a microblog retrieval system, MutualRanker, which
considers posts, users, and hashtags together as integral for retriev-
ing and ranking data. It presented the results on a graph visualization
along with its uncertainty calculated from a mutual reinforcement graph
model. Lu et al. [45] utilized semantic similarity to obtain relevant
textual records based on an interactively built concept map on a force-
directed layout. Wall et al. [59] developed Podium to interactively rank
and retrieve multi-variate data based on users’ subjective preferences,
which are obtained by capturing users’ drag interactions on a table
view. All the aforementioned methods aim to acquire relevant data
without consideration of labels, which thus cannot be directly extended
to improve the quality of labeled data. Therefore, we tightly integrate
visual analytics with the learning-from-crowds model to provide an
iterative and progressive environment for verifying uncertain instance
labels and unreliable workers.
Interactive labeling. Many visualization researchers have also pro-
posed employing active or incremental learning to help users interac-
tively label a variety of data. Heimerl et al. [23] presented a method
that incorporates active learning and interactive labeling for document
classiﬁcation. Paiva et al. [49] supported interactive labeling by help-
ing users interpret misclassiﬁed instances on a Neighbor Joining tree
and a similarity layout view. This concept of interactively labeling
data as part of a model learning process is also supported by other
visualization works [4, 6, 7, 9, 25]. An experimental study conducted
by Bernard et al. [5] demonstrated the promise of visual-interactive
labeling. It showed that visual-interactive labeling usually outperforms
active learning when class distributions are well separated by dimension
reduction. Different from these methods, our work focuses on labeling
crowdsourced data, which has speciﬁc data quality issues. The labeler
not only needs to label instances but also analyze worker behavior. In
addition, s/he often needs to understand the inﬂuence within instance

---PAGE---

Data Collection
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
Crowdsourced labels
Images
Feature
Extraction
Learning
from
Crowds
Modeling
Visualization
Iterative
Progressive
Coordinate
Synchronize
Instance Visualization
Confusion Visualization
Worker Visualization
Fig. 3. LabelInspect overview: the data modeling module estimates correct labels from crowdsourced annotations and updates the labeling results
based on expert validation; the visualization module allows analysts to interactively validate instance labels and spammer workers.
labels or workers as well as the mutual inﬂuence between them. There-
fore, LabelInspect consists of three highly coordinated visualizations
to facilitate the labeling process.
In the ﬁeld of machine learning, researchers have introduced expert
validation into learning-from-crowds models [27, 36]. These methods
have demonstrated the effectiveness of leveraging expert labels to re-
duce the labor involved and improve the performance. However, they
all assume expert labels can be acquired easily. This is not true in many
real-world applications, in which experts have to repetitively browse
the data and carefully compare crowdsourced labels to provide useful
validations. Consequently, developing an effective validation procedure
is of theoretical and practical signiﬁcance.
3
DESIGN OF LABELINSPECT
In this section, we introduce the task analysis process and collected
tasks, as well as the visual analytics tool built on these tasks.
3.1
Task Analysis
This research is motivated by our own research projects that employ
supervised and semi-supervised learning as an analysis method. Be-
cause data quality is critical for data-driven tasks [1], in these projects,
after collecting labeled data from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT),
we often spent a lot of time and effort cleaning the data, including
discovering the most problematic instance labels and spammers. This
process is tedious and requires domain expertise in complex cases.
In order to identify the main scenarios in the aforementioned valida-
tion process, we conducted three interviews with four data scientists.
Two of them are R&D researchers from Inventec, whose job responsi-
bility is to validate the “pass/fail” labels of boards along the product
line (A1, A2). The other two are senior PhD students who often collect
and validate image labels for crowdsourcing-related research (A3, A4).
For brevity’s sake, we refer to data scientists as analysts and to domain
experts as experts throughout the rest of the paper. The interviews were
semi-structured with a focus on probing the participants validation
needs and processes by asking the following questions.
• How do you improve the quality of crowdsourced annotations?
• What are the major steps in the validation process?
• What type of information helps the validation process?
In the ﬁrst interview, the analysts said that they needed to understand the
crowdsourced labels and the labeling behavior of workers from different
perspectives, so that they can quickly identify the most problematic
data and suspicious workers. For objects that are easily confused with
each other, they usually consult with a domain expert who knows the
data. In such cases, an intuitive visualization is preferred to help explain
the reason for the confusion to the domain expert within the proper
context. Based on the interviews and our previous research experience,
we identiﬁed the following tasks:
T1 - Inspect the confusion degree among different categories and se-
lect the most confusing ones for detailed examination. This is especially
important when multiple-category labeled data is considered.
T2 - Understand the instance distribution under different category
labels, examine the confused instances between categories in context,
and then quickly identify the most problematic labels.
T3 - Analyze the reliability of each worker, form an assumption
of the spammer degree of the worker, verify the formed assumption
by checking the corresponding annotation results, and recognize
spammers in order to improve the labeling accuracy.
T4 - Check the inﬂuence within instances/workers, as well as mutual
inﬂuence between them. If the label of an instance is modiﬁed, the
analyst wants to understand its inﬂuence on other instances and the
workers who annotated this instance, and vice versa.
T5 - Examine the validation trail to understand the inﬂuence of each
validation on other instances/workers. The validation trail displays the
number of instances validated by the analyst in each propagation round
and the number of instances whose label estimates have been changed
with these veriﬁcations. By checking the trail, an analyst is able to
decide when to stop a validation process or roll back to a previous
state. For example, if the recent inﬂuence is very small, it might be one
indication to stop the validation process.
3.2
System Overview
Guided by the above tasks, we designed a visual analytics tool, La-
belInspect, to help analysts validate crowdsourced labels and acquire
high-quality training data. It consists of two modules: data modeling
and interactive visualization. They work together to provide an iterative
and progressive validation solution for data validation.
As shown in Fig. 3, the data modeling module focuses on collecting
the crowdsourced annotations and estimating correct labels from noisy
crowdsourced data using a learning-from-crowds model. In our im-
plementation, we take image data as an example to illustrate the basic
idea of the proposed method. We collected raw data from ImageNet
and obtained the crowdsourced labels from AMT. The estimated la-
bels were derived using the max-margin-majority-voting (M3V)-based
model [36]. After several veriﬁcations from the analyst are fed back,
the M3V-based model incrementally updates the labeling results to start
a new round of validation. The visualization module consists of three
coordinated visualizations to enable analysts to interactively validate
crowdsourced data and improve the labeling accuracy. By examining
the confusion between different classes in the confusion visualization,
the analyst can pick out the most confused ones to start the validation
process (T1). Then the instance visualization is employed to show the
uncertain labels in the context of other relevant instances (T2). The
experts ﬁrst verify several seed instances and/or workers, and then
candidate instances and workers are selected for further validation. The
inﬂuence of veriﬁed results is propagated to relevant instances and
workers through the M3V-based model (T4). In the worker visual-
ization, a scatter plot is employed to illustrate worker reliability (T3).
By checking the spammer score and labeling results, the analyst can
identify the highly reliable workers and spammers. The validation of
workers will also propagate to other data via the M3V-based model.
The three visualizations are closely coordinated through a set of analy-

---PAGE---

sis methods, such as candidate selection for further veriﬁcations (T4),
validation propagation to reﬂect the validation impact on the relevant
instances/workers (T4), and exploration of the validation trail to roll
back to a previous validation step (T5).
4
DATA MODELING
The current implementation uses two image datasets, a dog dataset with
4 categories and a bird dataset with 10 categories from ImageNet [16].
The dog dataset already contains the crowdsourced annotations [65].
For the bird dataset, we utilize AMT to collect crowdsourced annota-
tions. Each worker labels an image at most once, and each image is
labeled 12 times. We exclude workers with a low number of annotations
(less than 60 labels) or low accuracy (less than 20% on the gold standard
images). The resulting crowdsourced dataset is available at http://
cgcad.thss.tsinghua.edu.cn/shixia/crowd.zip. For
each dataset, we ﬁrst perform feature extraction, then employ a learning-
from-crowds model to infer the initial true labels and incrementally
update the labeling results based on validation.
Feature Extraction. Previous studies have shown that feature vectors
extracted from deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained on a
large labeled dataset, such as the ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 dataset [51],
can represent the image very well and be used in different pattern
recognition tasks [17, 64]. As a result, for the dog dataset, whose
categories are all covered by the ILSVRC 2012 dataset [51]), we employ
the outputs of the last but one fully-connected layer of a pre-trained
VGG-16 [52] as the feature vectors. In particular, we utilize the pre-
trained Keras VGG-16 model on the ILSVRC 2012 dataset [12]). The
aforementioned feature vectors work well for the dog dataset since all
4 categories in this dataset are included in the ILSVRC 2012 dataset.
However, the bird dataset includes images of several species that
are not contained in the ILSVRC 2012 dataset, thus the extracted
features with the Keras model do not differentiate them well. To solve
this problem, we employ a ﬁne-tuning method [21] to adapt the pre-
trained VGG-16 model to our task. In particular, we replace all the fully
connected layers of the Keras VGG-16 model with three fully connected
layers and update the model weights with a set of additional training
samples. This sample set consists of 800 images whose labels are
inferred by the learning-from-crowds model with the least uncertainty
and 10,672 images of the 10 bird species from ImageNet, resulting
in a training set of 8,030 images and a validating set of 3,442 images.
We also use the output of the last but one fully-connected layer of the
ﬁne-tuned model as the feature vector of each image.
The Learning-From-Crowds Model. We employ a semi-supervised
learning-from-crowds method, the M3V-based model [36], to estimate
the true labels from noisy crowdsourced annotations and gradually
integrate the expert labels, which are conﬁrmed by the analyst via a
step-by-step validation process. The detailed formulation and solution
of this model can be found in [36]. The advantage of using this method
is that it introduces additional expert labels into the learning-from-
crowds framework and incrementally updates the learning model as
new expert labels arrive. This method is also utilized to infer the initial
true labels from the crowdsourced annotations.
5
VISUALIZATION
LabelInspect consists of three major visualizations. The confusion
visualization illustrates the confusion degree among classes and helps
select a few classes to start (T1). The instance visualization uses a
constrained t-SNE projection to visualize the instances of interest and
highlights the most informative ones using uncertain glyphs (T2). A
scatter plot is employed in the worker visualization to demonstrate
worker reliability (T3). Instance and worker visualizations are coordi-
nated so that veriﬁcations on either visualization will update both of
them to reﬂect their mutual inﬂuence (T4). In addition, a validation
trail and clear images are provided to aid the validation process (T5).
5.1
Confusion Visualization
The exploration of confusion matrix has been supported in Talbot et
al.’s EnsembleMatrix [55] to understand and compare multiple classi-
ﬁers. In our approach the concept of confusion matrix is extended and
used to explore the relationship between worker labeling and model
estimates. The confusion visualization (Fig. 1(a)) is developed to illus-
trate whether workers confuse two or more classes. This is important
because in a multi-class labeling task, identifying a few (often two)
mixed classes can dramatically reduce the workload and difﬁculty of
validating the annotations. In order to effectively visualize possible
confusion patterns, we calculate a worker confusion matrix and reorder
it to reveal block patterns where each block can be considered to be
one subset of the confusing classes.
The worker confusion matrix represents the mismatch between the
workers’ labeling results and model-inferred results. It is an m × m
matrix where m is the number of classes. Each column represents the
inferred class from the M3V-based model, and each row represents
the label assigned by the workers. The cell in the ith row and jth
column represents the percentage of times that instances inferred to
be the column class cj have been labeled as the row class ci. We
denote the percentage as LabelP(ci,c j). For example, in Fig. 1A, the
model-inferred house sparrows are labeled as “ house sparrow” 61%
of the time, and as “tree sparrow” 29%. Generally, LabelP(ci,cj)
and LabelP(cj,ci) are not equal, and we take their average to be the
similarity between ci and c j.
Once the worker confusion matrix has been calculated, a matrix
reordering algorithm is developed to reveal the block pattern visually.
A reordered matrix with a block pattern shows coherent rectangular
areas (blocks) and each block indicates the set of confusion classes.
As the Optimal-Leaf-Ordering (OLO) algorithm [2] has been shown
to be optimal for demonstrating blocks [3], we have employed this
reordering algorithm.
Our confusion visualization uses a single hue sequential color
scheme to encode each cell according to its label percentage value
so that the groups are easily identiﬁed as dark blocks. A quantitative
color scheme is used to distinguish classes that are labeled along the
left and bottom sides of the matrix. This visualization supports class
selection for the instance inspection, and the percentage values update
in each validation round to cue the analyst on the validation progress.
5.2
Instance Visualization
Once we have the classes selected, the instance visualization will show
all the instances inferred to be in these classes and the analysts can
explore the instance labels and work on instance-level validation.
Visual Encoding. This visualization is designed as a circular-based
constraint layout (Fig. 1(b)), where the outer arcs represent classes and
the length is proportional to the number of instances. Instances are
plotted within the circle. Same as the confusion visualization, the color
represents the class.
Our underlying model will recommend some uncertain instances
that are encoded using uncertain glyphs, while the remaining instances
are encoded as simple dots with colors indicating their inferred classes.
The uncertain glyph, as shown in Fig. 1B, consists of a centered dot
indicating the inferred class, the surrounding colored arcs denoting
the distribution of worker assignments, arrowhead markers pointing
towards corresponding class arcs (marked by the workers) on the outer
circle, and an optional snapshot providing a quick spot of the instance
(Fig. 1C). In our implementation, 20 uncertain instances are selected by
the MRG model (Sec. 5.4). The position of an instance is determined by
a constrained t-SNE projection, which is explained later in this section.
The snapshot position is calculated using a clutter-aware label-layout
algorithm [48] to ensure that the snapshot is close to its instance while
not cluttered with other snapshots. Given these snapshots, analysts can
quickly judge whether the prediction of the model is accurate.
Constrained t-SNE Projection. We propose a constrained t-SNE pro-
jection for instance visualization so that 1) similar instances are grouped
together; 2) instances tend to plot towards their inferred class and the
most uncertain ones are pulled by all its possible class labels; and 3)
instances try to keep their previous positions when being updated.
Although t-SNE [46] maintains the relationships between instances
in the low-dimensional space, it does not consider the relationships
between the crowdsourced labels and the inferred labels. As a result,

---PAGE---

it is difﬁcult to utilize t-SNE to clearly reveal label errors. A super-
vised t-SNE is used in UTOPIAN [13] where the distances between the
same class instances are decreased by a parameter. In addition, Topi-
cLens [33] proposed a guided t-SNE where the group centroids on the
projected 2D space are ﬁrst calculated with a small set of instances and
then the centroids are used to add constraints for additional data points.
These methods consider instance labels or projection stability to some
extent. However, they do not control the layout position of the groups
and cannot meet our need that certain instances are close to its class arc
while uncertain instances are projected to the center. In addition to the
class-level readability supported by the guided t-SNE, we also want to
maintain instance-level stability so that the same instance will be close
to its previous position after each update.
Therefore, we have developed a novel constrained t-SNE projection
that balances readability and stability for the instance layout. Read-
ability helps preserve neighborhoods and clusters (overall readability),
reveals class association, and accentuates abnormal labels (class read-
ability). Stability helps control the position of the instance in the
iterative process and provides a stable context. Thus, for m classes and
n instances, we minimize the following cost function,
fcost = α ·KL(P ∥Q)+β ·KL(Pc ∥Qc)+(1−α −β)·KL(Ps ∥Qs),
(1)
where KL(· ∥·) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL)-divergence between two
distributions. The ﬁrst KL-divergence is the same as the original t-
SNE [46] for projecting the n instances and preserving the overall
readability. The second KL-divergence is to maintain the class read-
ability. The last KL-divergence is to improve stability in the iterative
validation process. α, β ∈[0,1] are two weights to balance them.
We introduce m class constraint arcs, one for each class, and n virtual
stability constraint points, one for each instance. Pc, Qc ∈Rn×m are
the joint probability distributions that measure pairwise similarities
between the instances and constraint arcs in the high-dimensional space
and low-dimensional space, respectively.
(Pc)ij =
 exp(−dh
ij/2σ 2)·I(c j ∈Li)
ei ∈U
exp(−dh
ij/2σ 2)·I(c j = li)
ei /∈U ,
(2)
(Qc)ij = (1+ ∥dp
ij ∥2)−1,
(3)
where I(·) is an indicator function, dh
ij is an estimated distance between
instance ei and arc of class cj in the high-dimensional space, and dp
i j is
the distance between instance ei and the nearest point on the arc of class
cj in the projected space. li represents the inferred label of instance ei,
Li is the set of labels that instance ei has been assigned by the crowd
workers, and U is a set of uncertain instances. To estimate dh
i j, we build
one hypersphere in the high-dimensional space for each class. This
hypersphere uses the class’s barycenter as its centroid and the distance
from the centroid to the farthest point as its radius. Then dh
i j is deﬁned
as the shortest distance from instance ei to the hypersphere.
Given the way we deﬁne Pc, uncertain instances will have multi-
ple class constraints decided by the labels assigned by the workers.
These constraints add the tendency to project such instances to the
middle/center of their confusion classes. For other instances, instead,
only one class constraint from the inferred class will be added, and they
will be pulled towards their inferred class arc.
For the stability constraint, the virtual point takes the same position
of the instance in the high-dimensional space and the last projected
position of the instance as its 2D position. Ps, Qs ∈Rn×1 are the joint
probability distributions that measure pairwise similarities between
the instances and stability constraint points in the high-dimensional
space and low-dimensional space, respectively. (Ps)i ∈[0,1] represents
the strength of the stability constraint added to instance ei. In our
implementation, Ps changes after every propagation.
(Ps)i =



0
ei is validated
0.5
ei is not validated, but its label has changed
1
otherwise
,
(4)
Stability constraints for validated instances are set to be 0 so that the
instances are able to be freely attracted to the conﬁrmed class. We
set a middle value, 0.5, for the instances whose inferred labels have
changed because of the propagation. In this way, their positions tend
to be closer to the arc of its newly inferred class but not too far away
from its previous position for easy tracking. Other instances stick to
their previous positions. Qs is the similarity in the 2D space between
instances and their previous positions. We use y′
i to denote the last
projected position of instance ei and Qs is deﬁned as: (Qs)i = (1+ ∥
yi −y′
i ∥2)−1.
Flow of Inﬂuence. Once an instance label is veriﬁed, the MRG model
will assign a high prior saliency to this instance and re-rank all instances
to reselect the 20 uncertain instances apart from the validated ones. This
new set of uncertain instances are displayed using instance glyphs. In
addition, the inﬂuence ﬂow from the veriﬁed instance to the 5 most
inﬂuenced candidate instances is displayed as a ﬂow map, as illustrated
in Fig. 1I. The ﬂow map helps to expose the internal status of the
validation propagation and inform the analyst of the effect. The layout
of the ﬂow paths from one source to multiple targets is based on the
ﬂow map layout [10] and the edge bundling developed by Holten et
al. [26]. The width of the ﬂow between two instances is proportional
to their similarity value, which denotes the inﬂuence degree from the
veriﬁed instance to the other instances on the ﬂow.
5.3
Worker Visualization
The inference of instance labels and worker reliability mutually inﬂu-
ence each other in crowdsourced data validation. Therefore, we have
developed a worker visualization to illustrate worker reliability and
enabled the validation of crowdsourced data from the worker-level data.
Overview. The worker visualization only plots workers who have
labeled the instances associated with the selected confusion classes.
A scatter-plot is implemented where the x-axis is the spammer score,
the y-axis is the accuracy according to model inferred labels. One dot
represents one worker where the size is proportional to the number
of instances s/he has labeled. The accuracy of a worker is measured
by the percentage of his labeled instances that match the model pre-
dictions. The spammer score is calculated by an approach that com-
bines the spammer detection method proposed by Hung et al. [27] and
block detection to support ﬁnding partial confusing spammers, which
is introduced below. Similar to uncertain instances, the MRG model
recommends K candidate workers and highlights them on the scatter
plot after a spammer is conﬁrmed. In our implementation (Fig. 1(c)),
K = 8, and these highlighted dots all have high spammer scores and
low accuracy.
An individual confusion matrix is coordinated with the scatter plot to
reveal the worker’s labeling performance (Fig. 1D). The design of this
matrix is the same as that of the worker confusion matrix except that
the individual confusion matrix only analyzes the data for one worker
on the selected confusion classes. The coordination between the scatter
plot and the individual confusion matrix is useful for revealing patterns
on a worker’s labeling performance. For example, the matrices shown
in Fig. 4 indicate two different confusion patterns. Fig. 4(a) indicates
that the worker has a problem distinguishing house sparrows from tree
sparrows, but is able to label falcons and ﬁsh eagles pretty well; while
Fig. 4(b) shows the opposite pattern for another worker. As such, the
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. Two different confusion patterns: (a) the worker has a problem
distinguishing house sparrows from tree sparrows, but has a high labeling
accuracy on the classes “falcon” and “ﬁsh eagle”; (b) the opposite pattern
for another worker.

---PAGE---

analyst can verify for which classes a worker is reliable or unreliable.
Given this veriﬁcation, the MRG model is able to update candidate
instances and workers. A ﬂow map is drawn to highlight the most
inﬂuenced workers. If a worker is identiﬁed as reliable, the M3V-based
model will increase the worker’s prior reliability score. If a worker is
identiﬁed as a spammer for a few classes, we remove the most likely
incorrect labels assigned by the worker, and then as suggested by the
analyst, we lower the prior of the reliability of the worker.
Spammer Score. Hung et al. [27] calculated the spammer score as
the distance from the prediction matrix to its closest rank-one approxi-
mation for random and uniform spammers. However, for multi-class
labeling tasks, a spammer may only confuse between a subset of the
classes rather than all of the entries. Comparing the worker’s individual
confusion matrix to its rank-one approximation cannot detect these
partial spammers. To solve this problem, we developed a block-based
spammer detection method, which calculates the spammer score in the
following two steps:
Step 1: Block Detection is used to identify the block pattern in a
worker’s confusion matrix. Matrix reordering, as described in Sec. 5.1,
is ﬁrst applied to put blocks, if any, along the diagonal. We denote
this reordered matrix as L. In our work, a block indicates that a subset
of the classes are difﬁcult to separate by the workers, and therefore,
we consider all blocks to be square. Detecting these squared blocks is
equivalent to ﬁnding segments along the ordered classes such that the
sum of the density in each block indexed by each segment is maximized.
We denote B(i, j) as the block from class ci to class cj in the ordered
matrix L. The density of B(i, j) is deﬁned as:
density(i, j) =
(
(∑j
x=i ∑j
y=i L[x,y]−∑j
x=i L[x,x])/((j −i)(j −i+1))
i f
i < j
0
i f
i = j
(5)
where L[x,y] is the value of the xth row and yth column in L. We
remove the diagonal values and consider only the “confusion” part (off-
diagonal cells). We solve this following the time series segmentation
problem using a dynamic programming approach [24].
Step 2: Aggregation is then preformed to aggregate the spammer
score, s(w), for worker w, based on the detected number of blocks, k.
The goal is to assign the highest spammer score to one-block work-
ers who mixed all classes, and the lowest spammer score to m-block
workers who separated all classes. For middling workers, their score
depends on the number of blocks and how confused they are within
each block. As such, the spammer score for worker w is deﬁned as:
s(w) = 1
k ∑k
i=1 min ˆMw(i) ∥Mw −ˆMw(i) ∥F, where Mw is the individual
confusion matrix for worker w, and ˆMw(i) is the rank-i approximation
matrix to Mw, using the Frobenius norm. This problem is solved using
singular value decomposition [19].
Crowd Workers Characterization. Previous studies have character-
ized crowd workers into ﬁve types in terms of their expertise, including
reliable workers, normal workers, sloppy workers, uniform spammers,
and random spammers [32, 27]. These types are speciﬁcally deﬁned
for binary classiﬁcation. For multi-class classiﬁcation, in addition to
these ﬁve types, we identify a sixth type, partial spammers, who have
certain ability to label a subset of the tasks, but behave as random or
uniform spammers for the rest. Fig. 5 illustrates the characteristics of
the six types of workers by using the scatter plot and the individual
confusion matrix.
• Reliable workers have high accuracy and low spammer scores.
Their confusion matrices have very high values in the diagonal
cells and very low values in the off-diagonal cells (Fig. 5A).
• Normal workers have relatively high accuracy and low spammer
scores, but not as accurate as reliable workers. This is evidenced
by the fact that their matrices have relatively high values in the
diagonal cells and relatively low values in the off-diagonal cells
(Fig. 5B).
• Sloppy workers have low accuracy and medium spammer scores.
Their labeling is not very reliable in general, and it is hard to ﬁnd
a high quality subset of task. Accordingly, in the confusion matri-
ces, the values of the diagonal cells are a little higher than those of
the off-diagonal cells. However, the difference is trivial (Fig. 5C).
Reliable
Worker
Random/
Uniform
Spammer
Sloppy Worker
Normal Worker
Partial Spammer Worker
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 5. Illustration of six different worker types on the worker visualization.
• Partial spammers have medium accuracy and relatively high
spammer scores. Their confusion matrices show obvious block
patterns and they either can label some classes accurately or
separate instances between class families (e.g.,a sparrow is only
mislabeled as another type of sparrows, but not as an eagle or
owl (Fig. 5D)).
• Random spammers have low accuracy and high spammer score.
They often carelessly assign labels to all instances. Thus, the
corresponding confusion matrices demonstrate no clear patterns.
Typically, the values of the diagonal cells are similar to those of
the off-diagonal cells (Fig. 5E).
• Uniform spammers also have low accuracy and high spammer
scores, similar to the random spammers. These workers usually
assign the same label to all instances. As a result, their confusion
matrices have an all-one row with other cells being 0 (Fig. 5F).
Random spammers and uniform spammers are considered to be the
most unreliable workers. Though they have different patterns on their
individual confusion matrices, they are all plotted towards the lower
right corner on the scatter plot (Fig. 5).
5.4
Interactive and Iterative Exploration Environment
This section introduces the coordination of the three major visual-
izations. It includes a MRG model that uses the mutual inﬂuencing
instance and worker information to select candidates, a detail view to
assist instance validation and record historical veriﬁcations, and a set
of interactions that link these visualizations.
Mutual Reinforcement Graph Model. In order to help analysts vali-
date data efﬁciently, uncertain instances and workers are selected by
the system based on instance label uncertainty and worker unreliability.
This candidate selection can be formulated as a ranking problem. A
straightforward solution is to leverage the PageRank algorithm [8].
However, the PageRank algorithm only inﬂuences items in the same
graph, while the MRG model has advantages in terms of leveraging
both the relationships within the instances or workers, and the mutual
inﬂuence between them. As a result, we employ the MRG model to
rank the items in the instance graph and worker graph. The relationship
between these two graphs indicates which instances have been labeled
by a worker. The instance graph has each node represent one instance,
and each pair of nodes are connected by an edge whose weight is the
similarity between them. The worker graph is built in the same way,
while worker similarity is calculated using SimRank [29] on a bipartite
instance-worker graph. We build the instance-worker bipartite graph
as described in [28]: (i) each worker w is represented by a node; (ii)
each instance e is represented by m nodes (m is the number of classes):
e(c1),e(c2),...,e(cm); (iii) an edge (w, e(ci)) is added if worker w labels
instance e as class ci.
The MRG model employs a similar method to PageRank [8] to model
the mutual inﬂuence between workers and instances, as well as the in-
ﬂuence within each graph. We deﬁne Re and Rw as the ranking score
vectors for instances and workers respectively. The initial scores for all
items are the same (1/nt, nt is the total number of instances and work-
ers), and they are calculated iteratively through the following equation:
Re
Rw

= λ
αeeMee
αweMwe
αewMew
αwwMww
Re
Rw

+(1−λ)
Ve
Vw

(6)

---PAGE---

where Mxy denotes the afﬁnity matrix from x to y, and x, y can be
instances or workers. αxy is used to make a trade-off of the mutual
reinforcement strength among instances and workers. λ is the damping
factor for determining the importance of a worker or an instance. Ve
and Vw are the prior saliency (uncertainty and spammer score) of
instances and workers, respectively.
In the progressive validation process, the ranking scores are updated
by increasing the prior saliency of veriﬁed instances and workers. Once
the ranking scores change, the instance visualization and worker visual-
ization employ the MRG model to update their uncertain candidates.
The Detail View and Interactions. In order to assist instance valida-
tion, we have developed a detail view for analysts to inspect instances
and check their validation histories. A set of rich interactions are also
provided to assist the validation process.
Instance Inspection in Detail. We allow the analyst to check the
selected instance(s) in detail to conﬁrm his/her validation. The analyst
can click on one candidate instance or select a few using a lasso selec-
tion in the instance visualization, and the detail view will display the
images associated with these instances. Similarly, the analyst can click
on a worker on the scatter plot and this will bring the images labeled
by this worker into the detail view. Clicking on a cell of the worker’s
prediction matrix will further ﬁlter down the images to those associated
with the selected class. The analyst can enlarge an instance image and
crop the image if s/he thinks the feature can be improved by removing
some background objects or focus more on a local area. The cropped
image will be fed back to the feature extraction step which triggers a
linked update of the model, the instance and worker visualizations.
Validation Trail and Roll Back. We have developed a validation trail
to show the numbers of validated instances and the instances whose
labels are changed by the veriﬁcations. Fig. 1(d) shows the validation
trail after a few rounds of validation and propagation. Each round is
represented by two bars, where the left bar represents the number of
veriﬁed instances and the right bar indicates the number of impacted
instances. Analysts can click on the bars to recall which instances are
veriﬁed and impacted. These instances will be displayed in the detail
view as images. In addition, they are allowed to roll back to a previous
validation status by clicking on “redo” under each validation bar.
Coordination between Instance and Worker Validations. A core
feature of LabelInspect is its coordination between instance and
spammer validation. We support a tightly linked interactive exploration
of the instance and worker visualizations. For example, when an
instance is hovered over, the workers who labeled this instance will
be highlighted. When one or multiple instances are selected, displayed
workers will be ﬁltered down to those who have labeled any of these
instances, and the dot for each worker will also change to a pie chart.
The dot size matches the number of instances the worker labeled
among the selected ones and the area of the sector represents the ratio
of the class labels the worker assigned to these instances. The color
of each sector matches the color of the corresponding class. On the
other hand, mousing over a cell of a worker’s confusion matrix will
highlight all instances labeled by him/her on the instance visualization.
Given these linked interactions, the analyst can explore instance labels
and worker reliabilities conjointly. Validation on either side will update
the uncertain candidates on both instances and workers through the
MRG model, and the propagations of analysts’ validations will also
update both instance label estimates and worker’s spammer scores.
6
CASE STUDIES
We conducted two case studies to demonstrate how to effectively use
LabelInspect to improve the quality of crowdsourced annotations from
both the instance and worker perspectives.
6.1
Bird Image Validation
In this case study, we collaborated with A1 and A3 to show how LabelIn-
spect helps improve crowdsourced annotations with lower estimation
accuracy. Initially, A1 indicated that the model estimation accuracy of
the bird dataset was relatively low (accuracy: 82.05%), and wanted to
improve it by using LabelInspect.
Overview (T1, T2). To begin with, A1 looked at the confusion vi-
sualization (Fig. 1(a)) and quickly found that among the 10 species,
most of the disagreements involved two species in one block. There
were 5 pairs of confusion classes in total. Furthermore, the confusion
degrees between these 5 pairs were relatively low. To further conﬁrm
this observation, A1 selected all 10 species and turned to the instance
visualization. As shown in Fig. 1(b), only a few instances were pro-
jected to the center of the view, and the majority of the confusions were
within each confusion class pair. Among the 5 pairs, the sparrow pair
(“house sparrow” and “tree sparrow”), the sandpiper pair (“pectoral
sandpiper” and “spotted sandpiper”), and the swan pair (“bewick’s
swan” and “mute swan”) were confused the most often. Therefore, A1
decided to start his validation with the sparrow pair (the ‘tree sparrow’
class in olive and the ‘house sparrow’ class in purple) since it involved
the most confusion.
Starting with Instance Analysis (T2). With “house sparrow” and
“tree sparrow” selected, the olive and purple dots were often mixed in
the instance visualization. A1 looked at the snapshots of the uncertain
instances recommended by the tool and he found that many of those in
the center were misclassiﬁed by the M3V-based model. For example,
the 5 instances circled in Fig. 6A were estimated to be “tree sparrow”
(olive), however, they should have been “house sparrow” (purple).
Therefore, A1 corrected their labels. It was very interesting to ﬁnd that
these 5 house sparrow instances were all misclassiﬁed as “tree sparrow”
by the model. A1 wanted to understand why this happened. He then
selected these 5 instances using the lasso selection in the instance
visualization to examine how the workers labeled them. Given the
selected instances, the scatter plot (Fig. 1(c)) in the worker visualization
ﬁltered for any workers that had labeled these 5 instances, and each of
the remaining workers was then represented as a pie chart displaying
the ratio of the labels they assigned to these instances.
Focusing on Spammer Analysis (T3, T4). The worker with the high-
est accuracy and lowest spammer score (worker A in Fig. 1E) caught
A3’s attention because he noticed that 2 instances were mislabeled by
this worker though s/he had a high inferred reliability. Worker A’s
confusion matrix (Fig. 1D) indicated that his/her labeling results mostly
matched with the estimates of the model, as the diagonal cells of the
matrix had high values but off-diagonal cells had low values. Recall
that the 5 mislabeled instances were all recognized as class ‘tree spar-
row’ (olive) by this worker and the model. A3 hypothesized that this
worker and the model must have both mislabeled many house sparrows
(purple) as tree sparrows (olive). A3 then loaded the corresponding
images into the detail view. These images were all estimated to be
tree sparrow by the model and labeled as “tree sparrow” by worker A.
A3 checked the ﬁrst 8 images and found 4 of them should have been
“house sparrow.” He also noticed that one image (Fig. 1J) was confusing
because the key features (the colors of crown and cheek) were hidden.
A3 consulted an expert (an ornithologist) and conﬁrmed it to be “house
sparrow.” This ﬁnding veriﬁed his hypothesis that worker A and the
model both mislabeled many house sparrows as tree sparrows, and
worker A’s accuracy needed to be lowered
Given the fact that 5 out of the 8 checked instances were labeled
wrong by worker A, A3 doubted worker A’s reliability. To quickly
examine the labels of the remaining images labeled as “tree sparrow”
by both the model and worker A, A3 hovered over the row name “tree
sparrow” on the worker’s confusion matrix to highlight these images in
the instance visualization. As shown in Fig. 6(a), these images were
projected in both areas of the two species. Similarly, the instances
labeled as “house sparrow” by worker A were also projected evenly on
the space. Accordingly, A3 veriﬁed worker A as a random partial spam-
mer between “house sparrow” and “tree sparrow.” Then we utilized the
two-step strategy (Sec. 5.3) to process worker A.
The spammer identiﬁcation of worker A triggered an update in
the MRG model that recommended several other workers needed to
be investigated. As shown on the ﬂow map (Fig. 1H), workers B
(Fig. 1F) and C (Fig. 1G) were recommended but their spammer scores
were not as high as other recommended workers. Being interested
in these two workers, A3 checked their confusion matrices and some
labeled instances. Following a similar process to the analysis of worker

---PAGE---

(a)
(c)
(b)
A
B
D
C
E
Fig. 6. Instance visualizations of the selected classes: (a) “house sparrow” and “tree sparrow”; (b) “Norfolk Terrier” and “Norwich Terrier”; (c) “Irish
Wolfhound” and “Scottish Deerhound.”
A, A3 quickly conﬁrmed that B and C were very likely to have the
same spammer behavior as worker A. They tended to misidentify “tree
sparrow” and “house sparrow” but their labeling results still matched
the model’s estimates to some extent. Therefore, A3 veriﬁed them
as random partial spammer with regards to these two species. After
verifying 11 instances and 3 spammers, A3 ﬁnished his ﬁrst round of
validation and propagated his veriﬁcations using the M3V-based model.
At that point, the labeling accuracy of the bird dataset had increased
from 82.05% to 83.15%.
Detecting More Spammers After Propagation (T4, T5). After the
ﬁrst round of propagation, A3 found that the spammer score increased
a great deal for one unveriﬁed worker. A3 checked this worker using
a similar method as for worker A, and veriﬁed that s/he was also a
random spammer. A3 also noticed that the spammer score of worker A
changed from 0.089 to 0.603. However, the spammer score was still not
high given the fact that it was now veriﬁed as a random partial spammer
for these two classes. Therefore, A3 checked the uncertain instances
recommended by the tool and also labeled by worker A, because doing
so A3 could very likely ﬁnd more instances mislabeled by the M3V-
based model. Similarly, A3 also checked some instance labels that had
been suggested by the tool and labeled by other spammers. Following
this strategy, A3 veriﬁed 16 instances until the spammer scores of those
veriﬁed spammers became higher. During the validation process, A3
found two images that were hard to distinguish, as shown in Figs. 2(c-d),
because they lacked the key features necessary to differentiate “house
sparrow” and “tree sparrow.” A3 then asked the expert to identify
the labels of these two images and validated them with the expert
labels. Referring to the validation trail, the propagation also became
stable, which indicated that there were not many instances that had
been inﬂuenced by the changed labels. A3 was now satisﬁed with the
current validation between “house sparrow” and “tree sparrow.” In total
4 spammers were identiﬁed and 33 instances were veriﬁed, and the
accuracy improved to 84.45%.
Validating Other Classes. After ﬁnishing the validation with the two
sparrow-related classes, A3 turned to other confusion pairs. Similar
cases were found in which some spammers had matching labels with
the model so that their spammer scores were low in the beginning.
Similar to the exploration for the sparrow-related classes, A3 validated
9 instances for eagle/falcon species, 8 for owls, 7 for sandpipers, and
3 for swans. Correspondingly, the accuracy improved to 86.10%,
86.30%, 87.50%, and 89.55%. As shown in Table 1, compared with
the M3V-based model (84.50%), LapelInspect achieved a higher accu-
racy when validating the same number of instances (3.0% validation
effort). The validation effort is measured by the proportion of the
validated instances among all instances. Given the accuracy of 89.55%,
LabelInspect requires considerably less validation efforts (3.0%) than
the M3V-based model (more than 10.0%), which reduces expert effort
Table 1. Accuracy(%) of the M3V-based model at different efforts.
Data
Effort
1.0%
2.5%
3.0%
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
Bird
82.65
83.90
84.50
87.45
88.55
89.05
Dog
88.88
90.00
90.50
92.00
92.65
93.00
by 70.0% [36]. This is due to the fact that LabelInspect helped A1 and
A3 select more representative instances and spammers by leveraging
the coordinated visualizations. For example, A3 commented, “Worker
inspection, instance veriﬁcations, and their mutual inﬂuence help en-
hance my validation effectiveness,” while the M3V-based model [36]
only considers the instance label validation.
6.2
Dog Image Validation
This case study is used to demonstrate that LabelInspect can also
improve crowdsourced annotations with higher estimation accuracy.
For this case study, we collaborated with A2 and A4. The dog dataset
has four dog species labeled with AMT and the results estimated by the
M3V-based model have a relatively high accuracy (88.13%). However,
validation is still desired by A4 to meet the high accuracy requirement
of his classiﬁcation task.
Overview (T1). Starting with the confusion visualization, A2 saw a
clear block pattern that indicated the terrier-related classes and the
hound-related classes were separable while there seemed to be con-
fusion between “Norfolk Terrier” and “Norwich Terrier,’ and “Irish
Wolfhound” and “Scottish Deerhound.” A2 decided to start with the
classes “Norfolk Terrier” and “Norwich Terrier.”
Conﬁrming Model Inferred Labels (T2, T3). The instance visual-
ization (Fig. 6(b)) showed that these two species were separated well.
Regarding the image snapshots with the uncertain glyphs, it seemed
that most of the label estimates were correct. However, A2 looked at
the glyphs in the center and found that instance A (Fig. 6B) was labeled
as “Norfolk Terrier” (blue) by many workers while the model estimated
it to be “Norwich Terrier” (orange). Noticing this contradiction, A2
clicked on the instance to check. The worker visualization showed that
although fewer workers labeled it as “Norwich Terrier,” they in general
had high accuracy and low spammer score. A2 found that this instance
was recommended by the tool because many unreliable workers had
mislabeled it and the model’s estimate was reliable. Therefore, A2 con-
ﬁrmed the label of instance A and two other instances like this (Fig. 6C
and Fig. 6D). In addition, A2 also veriﬁed some other recommended
instances by MRG. For the terrier-related classes, 7 instances were
validated and the accuracy was improved to 90.75%.
Focusing on Instance Analysis (T1, T4). Next, A4 selected the classes
“Irish Wolfhound” and “Scottish Deerhound” for further validation.
The instance visualization of these two types of hounds showed a

---PAGE---

high level of confusion (Fig. 6(c)). The recommended instances were
all estimated as “Scottish Deerhound” (red). However, A4 spotted
many label errors by looking at the image snapshots. A4 speculated
that the M3V-based model was inclined to assign the label “Scottish
Deerhound” (red) to the instances, and this also aligned with the fact
that the red arc was much longer than the green arc. To investigate
the underlying cause, A4 focused on validating instances that were
estimated to be “Scottish Deerhound” (red). A4 started with instance B
(Fig. 6E), which was mixed with many green instances. Checking the
image, A4 found that instance B should be “Irish Wolfhound” and then
corrected it. The 5 most inﬂuenced instances, indicated by the ﬂow map,
were checked by A4 consecutively and they were all mislabeled. A4
propagated his validation after correcting these 6 labels. One instance
moved a long way on the projected space and A4 examined it closely.
This instance was also labeled wrong and A4 then assigned “Scottish
Deerhound” to it. By repeating the above validation procedure, 13
instances were validated and the accuracy was improved to 93.00%. In
total, we validated 20 instances (validation efforts: 2.5%) to achieve an
accuracy of 93.00%. As shown in Table 1, to achieve the same accuracy,
the M3V-based model requires considerably more validation efforts
(10.0%) than LabelInpsect. Thus, our tool reduce 75.0% expert effort.
A4 believed that this accuracy was acceptable for his classiﬁcation task,
so he stopped the veriﬁcation process.
7
DISCUSSION
Our visual analytics method has presented an evidence that well de-
signed interactive visualizations provide an effective data validation
environment, which is consistent with the previous ﬁndings that in
many cases, visual analytics methods work better than pure machine-
learning-based methods [15, 40, 41, 44, 56]. For the bird dataset, the
initial accuracy of the label estimates learned by the M3V-based model
was not high (82.05%). This led to a slight misjudgment where several
spammers did not have high spammer scores. The ﬁrst case study
demonstrated that LabelInspect compensated for the M3V-based model
greatly and improved the labeling accuracy effectively by deﬁning par-
tial spammers and allowing the analyst to investigate both workers and
instances. On the other hand, the dog dataset has relatively high label-
ing quality and the initial estimation accuracy was high (88.13%). For
this type of dataset, the spammer score measures the worker’s reliability
quite well, and the analyst focused more on investigating and validating
instances. The second case study demonstrated that iterative uncertain
candidate selection and validation propagation effectively improved the
data labeling accuracy even on top of a high quality dataset.
In addition to conducting two case studies, we also shared our system
with three analysts from different research institutes. Overall, LabelIn-
spect was well received by the analysts. They conﬁrmed the usefulness
of the tool for validating crowdsourced annotations and improving data
quality. The visualization design was praised and one analyst who
played with this system for about an hour commented, “I can quickly
ﬁnd that ‘tree sparrow’ and ‘house sparrow’ are badly separated,” and
he found the spammers with a quick glance. The ﬂow map on the
instance visualization hinted to the newly identiﬁed uncertain instances
and most inﬂuenced instances. He liked the combination of the instance
recommendation and the model propagation. The analyst commented,
“Whenever I fail to ﬁnd more to validate, I use the propagate button,
which seems to work pretty well.” Another analyst who spent over two
weeks to tune the parameters of the M3V-based model without the help
of LabelInspect improved labeled accuracy from 82.05% to 89.05%
commented, “LabelInspect is very effective and useful in helping me
improve the data quality of crowdsourced annotations. It only took me
two hours to improve the data quality to a satisfactory level, which usu-
ally takes me one or more weeks.” One crowdsourcing expert explicitly
said, “This is valuable work,” and he liked the worker visualization a
lot, especially the idea of validating spammers and indicating on which
classes they are likely to be wrong. “Validating spammer workers is a
remarkable function in this tool, and identifying partial spammers is
very useful. It saves more effort than validating one image a time and
provides more beneﬁts.”
Although LabelInpsect was positively received by the analysts, they
suggested several directions to improve this tool.
Generalization. In our implementation, image data was taken as an
example to illustrate the basic idea of interactive data validation. The
analysts expressed the need to employ LabelInspect to validate other
types of crowdsourced data. Our method can easily be extended to
handle other types of data with only some minor changes of the visu-
alization components. For example, for textual data, the snapshot in
the instance visualization can be replaced with a keyword-based text
summarization, and the detail view can display a multimedia-based
summary generated by Document Cards [53], which includes the im-
portant keywords and images of a document. Other than crowdsourced
data validation, the novel concept proposed in this paper can also be
generalized to other usages. The constrained t-SNE projection is a visu-
alization technique that can be used for generalized iterative analysis of
uncertain training data, and the spammer score proposed in this paper
together with the worker visualization can also be generalized to any
crowdsourced labeling analysis. In addition, the method for integrating
worker analysis and instance analysis is also able to generalize for
multi-facet labeling tasks.
Scalability. The bird dataset has about 2,000 images and LabelInspect
can respond to each interaction in real time. However, when the number
of instances becomes large (e.g., tens of thousands of instances), the in-
stance projection and the model propagation will suffer from increased
computational cost. Potential solutions are to employ a sampling tech-
nique (e.g., blue noise sampling [11, 39]) in the t-SNE based projection,
and to develop a scalable label propagation algorithm.
The instance visualization will become cluttered when the number
of instances increase, and it is difﬁcult to detect useful patterns from
the visualization. One possible solution is to combine a density-based
visualization [35, 60] with a t-SNE projection to reveal overall patterns,
important instances, and outliers.
Insufﬁcient handling of wrong validation. Currently, our method
regards the analysts’ validation as ground truth. However, this may not
always be correct. A wrong validation can lead to a decline in accuracy.
One possible solution to avoid accepting wrong validation is to examine
the gap between the model-centered estimation and human-centered
analysis. If the gap is large, we could ask the analyst to re-check his/her
validation based on a visual explanation that illustrates why the model
recommended a different prediction. Other more effective solutions to
this problem are still open to investigation.
8
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed LabelInspect, a visual analytics tool
to support crowdsourced data validation for preparing labeled training
data. LabelInspect incorporates learning models and visualizations
and enables mutual inﬂuencing validation from both the instance-level
and worker-level data. New techniques proposed include a constraint
t-SNE projection for instance visualization, a block-based spammer
score calculation, and an integrated system that incorporates expert’s
veriﬁcations into an iterative and progressive validation process. We
conducted two case studies to demonstrate the effectiveness of LabelIn-
spect and the results indicate that label accuracy has been improved
successfully.
Although LabelInspect has been shown to be effective, further work
on the following aspects is still promising. First, addressing the above
mentioned limitations in terms of scalability and expert trust would be
critical for prompting this tool to a wide usage. Second, to strengthen
the analysis of worker behavior, reputation-based worker/instance ﬁl-
tering needs to be further studied. Third, it might be beneﬁcial to allow
multiple experts to work together on validating the same datasets for a
more accurate labeled dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by National Key R&D Program of China
(No. SQ2018YFB100002), the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No.s 61761136020, 61672308), and Microsoft Research Asia.
The authors would like to thank Liwang Zhou for implementing part of
the learning-from-crowds algorithm and the anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments. B. Wang is the corresponding author.

---PAGE---

REFERENCES
[1] C. Arbesser, F. Spechtenhauser, T. M¨uhlbacher, and H. Piringer. Visplause:
Visual data quality assessment of many time series using plausibility
checks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
23(1):641–650, 2017.
[2] Z. Bar-Joseph, D. K. Gifford, and T. S. Jaakkola. Fast optimal leaf ordering
for hierarchical clustering. Bioinformatics, 17(suppl 1):S22–S29, 2001.
[3] M. Behrisch, B. Bach, N. Henry Riche, T. Schreck, and J.-D. Fekete.
Matrix reordering methods for table and network visualization. Computer
Graphics Forum, 35(3):693–716, 2016.
[4] M. Behrisch, F. Korkmaz, L. Shao, and T. Schreck. Feedback-driven
interactive exploration of large multidimensional data supported by visual
classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics
Science and Technology, pages 43–52, 2014.
[5] J. Bernard, M. Hutter, M. Zeppelzauer, D. Fellner, and M. Sedlmair.
Comparing visual-interactive labeling with active learning: An experimen-
tal study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
24(1):298–308, 2018.
[6] J. Bernard, D. Sessler, A. Bannach, T. May, and J. Kohlhammer. A visual
active learning system for the assessment of patient well-being in prostate
cancer research. In The Workshop on Visual Analytics in Healthcare, pages
1:1–1:8, 2015.
[7] T. Blascheck, F. Beck, S. Baltes, T. Ertl, and D. Weiskopf. Visual anal-
ysis and coding of data-rich user behavior. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 141–150,
2016.
[8] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search
engine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 30(1-7):107–117, 1998.
[9] P. Bruneau and B. Otjacques.
An interactive, example-based, visual
clustering system. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Visualisation, pages 168–173, 2013.
[10] K. Buchin, B. Speckmann, and K. Verbeek. Flow map layout via spi-
ral trees. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(12):2536–2544, 2011.
[11] H. Chen, W. Chen, H. Mei, Z. Liu, K. Zhou, W. Chen, W. Gu, and K.-L.
Ma. Visual abstraction and exploration of multi-class scatterplots. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(12):1683–1692,
2014.
[12] F. Chollet et al. Keras. https://keras.io/, 2018. Last accessed
2018-03-31.
[13] J. Choo, C. Lee, C. K. Reddy, and H. Park. Utopian: User-driven topic
modeling based on interactive nonnegative matrix factorization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):1992–2001,
2013.
[14] J. Choo and S. Liu. Visual analytics for explainable deep learning. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 38(4):84–92, 2018.
[15] W. Cui, S. Liu, L. Tan, C. Shi, Y. Song, Z. Gao, H. Qu, and X. Tong.
Textﬂow: Towards better understanding of evolving topics in text. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):2412–2421,
2011.
[16] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 248–255,
2009.
[17] J. Donahue, Y. Jia, O. Vinyals, J. Hoffman, N. Zhang, E. Tzeng, and
T. Darrell. DeCAF: A deep convolutional activation feature for generic
visual recognition. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 647–655, 2014.
[18] Y. Duan, Z. Chen, F. Wei, M. Zhou, and H.-Y. Shum. Twitter topic sum-
marization by ranking tweets using social inﬂuence and content quality. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 763–780, 2012.
[19] C. Eckart and G. Young. The approximation of one matrix by another of
lower rank. Psychometrika, 1(3):211–218, 1936.
[20] A. Endert, W. Ribarsky, C. Turkay, B. Wong, I. Nabney, I. D. Blanco, and
F. Rossi. The state of the art in integrating machine learning into visual
analytics. Computer Graphics Forum, 36(8):458–486, 2017.
[21] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik. Rich feature hierarchies
for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 580–587, 2014.
[22] M. C. Hao, H. Janetzko, S. Mittelst¨adt, W. Hill, U. Dayal, D. A. Keim,
M. Marwah, and R. K. Sharma. A visual analytics approach for peak-
preserving prediction of large seasonal time series. Computer Graphics
Forum, 30(3):691–700, 2011.
[23] F. Heimerl, S. Koch, H. Bosch, and T. Ertl. Visual classiﬁer training for
text document retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 18(12):2839–2848, 2012.
[24] J. Himberg, K. Korpiaho, H. Mannila, J. Tikanmaki, and H. T. Toivonen.
Time series segmentation for context recognition in mobile devices. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, pages
203–210, 2001.
[25] B. H¨oferlin, R. Netzel, M. H¨oferlin, D. Weiskopf, and G. Heidemann.
Inter-active learning of ad-hoc classiﬁers for video visual analytics. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, pages 23–32, 2012.
[26] D. Holten and J. J. Van Wijk. Force-directed edge bundling for graph
visualization. Computer Graphics Forum, 28(3):983–990, 2009.
[27] N. Q. V. Hung, D. C. Thang, M. Weidlich, and K. Aberer. Minimizing
efforts in validating crowd answers. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data, pages 999–1014, 2015.
[28] S. Jagabathula, L. Subramanian, and A. Venkataraman. Reputation-based
worker ﬁltering in crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 2492–2500, 2014.
[29] G. Jeh and J. Widom. SimRank: A measure of structural-context simi-
larity. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 538–543, 2002.
[30] S. Kandel, A. Paepcke, J. Hellerstein, and J. Heer. Wrangler: Interactive
visual speciﬁcation of data transformation scripts. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
3363–3372, 2011.
[31] S. Kandel, R. Parikh, A. Paepcke, J. M. Hellerstein, and J. Heer. Proﬁler:
Integrated statistical analysis and visualization for data quality assess-
ment. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces, pages 547–554, 2012.
[32] G. Kazai, J. Kamps, and N. Milic-Frayling. Worker types and personality
traits in crowdsourcing relevance labels. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
pages 1941–1944, 2011.
[33] M. Kim, K. Kang, D. Park, J. Choo, and N. Elmqvist. TopicLens: Efﬁcient
multi-level visual topic exploration of large-scale document collections.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(1):151–
160, 2017.
[34] J. Krause, A. Perer, and H. Stavropoulos. Supporting iterative cohort con-
struction with visual temporal queries. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 22(1):91–100, 2016.
[35] H. Liao, Y. Wu, L. Chen, and W. Chen. Cluster-based visual abstraction
for multivariate scatterplots. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (accepted), 2018.
[36] M. Liu, L. Jiang, J. Liu, X. Wang, J. Zhu, and S. Liu. Improving learning-
from-crowds through expert validation. In Proceedings of the International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 2329–2336, 2017.
[37] M. Liu, S. Liu, X. Zhu, Q. Liao, F. Wei, and S. Pan. An uncertainty-
aware approach for exploratory microblog retrieval. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(1):250–259, 2016.
[38] M. Liu, J. Shi, K. Cao, J. Zhu, and S. Liu. Analyzing the training processes
of deep generative models.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 24(1):77–87, 2018.
[39] M. Liu, J. Shi, Z. Li, C. Li, J. Zhu, and S. Liu. Towards better analysis of
deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 23(1):91–100, 2017.
[40] S. Liu, W. Cui, Y. Wu, and M. Liu. A survey on information visualization:
recent advances and challenges. The Visual Computer, 30(12):1373–1393,
2014.
[41] S. Liu, X. Wang, C. Collins, W. Dou, F. Ouyang, M. El-Assady, L. Jiang,
and D. Keim. Bridging text visualization and mining: A task-driven survey.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (accepted),
2018.
[42] S. Liu, X. Wang, M. Liu, and J. Zhu. Towards better analysis of ma-
chine learning models: A visual analytics perspective. Visual Informatics,
1(1):48–56, 2017.
[43] S. Liu, J. Xiao, J. Liu, X. Wang, J. Wu, and J. Zhu. Visual diagnosis of
tree boosting methods. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 24(1):163–173, 2018.
[44] S. Liu, M. X. Zhou, S. Pan, Y. Song, W. Qian, W. Cai, and X. Lian. Tiara:

---PAGE---

Interactive, topic-based visual text summarization and analysis. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 3(2):25, 2012.
[45] Y. Lu, H. Wang, S. Landis, and R. Maciejewski. A visual analytics frame-
work for identifying topic drivers in media events. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics (accepted), 2018.
[46] L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9(Nov):2579–2605, 2008.
[47] R. Maciejewski, A. Pattath, S. Ko, R. Hafen, W. S. Cleveland, and D. S.
Ebert. Automated box-cox transformations for improved visual encoding.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(1):130–
140, 2013.
[48] Y. Meng, H. Zhang, M. Liu, and S. Liu. Clutter-aware label layout. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium, pages 207–214,
2015.
[49] J. G. S. Paiva, W. R. Schwartz, H. Pedrini, and R. Minghim. An approach
to supporting incremental visual data classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 21(1):4–17, 2015.
[50] J. H. Park, S. Nadeem, S. Mirhosseini, and A. Kaufman. C2A: Crowd
consensus analytics for virtual colonoscopy. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 21–30,
2016.
[51] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang,
A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei. Ima-
geNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal
of Computer Vision, 115(3):211–252, 2015.
[52] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman.
Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition.
Computing Research Repository,
abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[53] H. Strobelt, D. Oelke, C. Rohrdantz, A. Stoffel, D. A. Keim, and
O. Deussen. Document cards: A top trumps visualization for documents.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(6):1145–
1152, 2009.
[54] J. Sun, F. Wang, J. Hu, and S. Edabollahi. Supervised patient similarity
measure of heterogeneous patient records. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter, 14(1):16–24, 2012.
[55] J. Talbot, B. Lee, A. Kapoor, and D. S. Tan. EnsembleMatrix: Interactive
visualization to support machine learning with multiple classiﬁers. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1283–1292, 2009.
[56] G. K. Tam, V. Kothari, and M. Chen.
An analysis of machine- and
human-analytics in classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 23(1):71–80, 2017.
[57] T. Tian and J. Zhu. Max-margin majority voting for learning from crowds.
In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 1621–1629, 2015.
[58] P. Wais, S. Lingamneni, D. Cook, J. Fennell, B. Goldenberg, D. Lubarov,
D. Marin, and H. Simons. Towards building a high-quality workforce with
mechanical turk. In NIPS Workshop on Computational Social Science and
the Wisdom of Crowds, pages 1–5, 2010.
[59] E. Wall, S. Das, R. Chawla, B. Kalidindi, E. T. Brown, and A. Endert.
Podium: Ranking data using mixed-initiative visual analytics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(1):288–297,
2018.
[60] X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Liu, J. Chen, J. Zhu, and B. Guo. TopicPanorama: A
full picture of relevant topics. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 22(12):2508–2521, 2016.
[61] L. Wilkinson. Visualizing big data outliers through distributed aggregation.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(1):256–
266, 2018.
[62] W. Willett, S. Ginosar, A. Steinitz, B. Hartmann, and M. Agrawala. Identi-
fying redundancy and exposing provenance in crowdsourced data analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2198–
2206, 2013.
[63] J. Xia, W. Chen, Y. Hou, W. Hu, X. Huang, and D. S. Ebertk. Dimscanner:
A relation-based visual exploration approach towards data dimension
inspection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics
Science and Technology, pages 81–90, 2016.
[64] M. D. Zeiler, G. W. Taylor, and R. Fergus. Adaptive deconvolutional
networks for mid and high level feature learning. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2018–2025, 2011.
[65] D. Zhou, S. Basu, Y. Mao, and J. C. Platt. Learning from the wisdom of
crowds by minimax entropy. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 2195–2203, 2012.